n and consumption continue at this rate and in this manner, it
will not be possible to sustain development and preserve the planet for
future generations ( Stahel, 2016 ). The strategic need for an alternative
model of growth emerged in terms of the debate about the circular
economy (CE), described as an economy with closed material loops.
Over the last decade the CE, also due to the challenges posed by of
the Circular Economy Action Plan, CE issues have attracted a great dealof attention. The efforts made by the Member States to shift their social
and economic activities towards “circularity ”have fostered changes in
the business model and labor market, with new business models and
new opportunities resulting from the implementation of the Reduction,
Reused and Recycling (3Rs) actions able to create four million new jobs,
to generate €147 billion in value added and promote €17.5 billion worth
of investments ( European Commission, 2015a ). Furthermore, the
recycling of municipal waste and the percentage of recycled material
reuse (with respect to overall materials demand) increased during the
last ten years. Despite this, the recycled materials do not even reach
the 12% of the EU materials demand, and, a full circularity is applied to
only 9% of the world economy, which indicates that there are still
wide margins for improvement ( European Commission, 2019d ). This
idea of CE considers it as a transformative economy rede ﬁning produc-
tion and consumption patterns, inspired by ecosystems principles and
restorative by design, which increases resilience, eliminates waste and
creates shared value through an enhanced circulation of material and
immaterial ﬂows ( Kirchherr et al., 2017 ). This concept highlights the
key factors of the paradigm: resources ef ﬁciency, sustainable economic
growth, environmental protection and social development. Following
Hislop and Hill (2011, p. 2) :“The circular economy represents a develop-
ment strategy that maximizes resource ef ﬁciency and minimizes waste pro-
duction, within the context of sustainable economic and social
development ”. With the reference to social-economic aspects, for
Preston (2012, p. 1) “A circular economy is an approach that would trans-
form the function of resources in the economy. Waste from factories would
become a valuable input to another process –and products could be
repaired, reused or upgraded instead of thrown away ”. Despite the differ-
ent emphases, perspectives and approaches these de ﬁnitions evolve
around the central idea that the CE is a 3R system with mainly environ-
mental, economic and social impacts. Many studies analyzed the issues
from a theoretical point of view. Kirchherr et al. (2017) elaborated a
comparison analysis with 114 CE de ﬁnitions, Ghisellini et al. (2016) per-
formed an ample review on CE issues at micro, meso and macro level.
More recently, Korhonen et al. (2018) analyzed the emergent literature
from several ﬁelds to identify concepts and account for the complexity
of the issues and the perspectives of different contributions. However,
only a few authors focused on the operative application at macro level
(Ghisellini et al., 2016 ) for an extended geographical area (i.e.
Europe), and followed a quantitative approach as well. This paper in-
tends to contribute in bridging this gap. Firstly, the relevant knowledge
is gathered and organized so as to rank the 28EU member states accord-
ing to their performances in terms of their transition towards the CE. In
particular, the indicators, relating to environmental (Produced Munici-
pal Waste, Produced Food Waste, Municipal waste recycling rate), eco-
nomic (Domestic Material Consumption, Market rate of recyclable raw
materials, Production Material Reuse rate), and socio-economic (Pat-ents related to Circular Economy, Implemented Best Practices) vari-
ables, are used to assess outcomes and highlight good practices, so as
to identify which of these are more likely to be conducive to a CE as
envisioned by the EU. In order to assess the degree of transition towards
the CE, we also evaluated GDP in PPS and the ratio of GDP/CEI correlat-
ing this information with the quantitative indicators. The performances
of the 28EU Member State was analyzed in the period 2006 –2016. The
study was developed, ﬁrstly carrying out a performance analysis of
each Member State in terms of the implementation of CE activities
and the progress made towards the achievement of EU circular objec-
tives. The accumulation of knowledge and application of quantitative
indicators, should allow for the design of a CE achievement process.The present analysis will be of interest for researchers, policy makers
and government planners, who can acquire information for the devel-
opment of CE strategies in long term plans.
The paper is organized as follow: sections two outlines a conceptual
background on the CE will be developed. Moreover, Section 3 shows the
state of art of the European context, Section 4 explains the elaborated
methodology, and Section 5 displays the results and related discussion.
Finally, Section 6 shows the conclusions of the paper.
2. Conceptual background
The literature and the EU directive and recommendations indicate
that most of the issues concerning the CE transition evolve around
waste, its production, its reuse and its disposal. In fact, the waste man-
agement is considered by European Commission (2019a) in overall
28EU Member States a strategic issue to address the transition from lin-
ear to circular economy. Liu et al. (2017) focused on the sustainable
waste management under the concepts of the CE through “Reduce,
Reuse and Recycle ”(3R) rules. They underlined the need for an ade-
quate legal framework and highlighted the importance of investing
both in technologies for the ef ﬁcient resource recycling and waste man-
agement infrastructures. Furthermore, Iacovidou et al. (2017b) pre-
sented an innovative approach “Complex Value Optimisation for
Resource ”(CVORR) that seeks to assess how complex value is created,
destroyed and distributed in resource recovery from waste systems. In
addition, in line with the Waste Framework Directive ( European Parlia-
ment, 2018 ) the municipal waste is a complex bottleneck in waste man-
agement because even if it does not represent the main part of the total
waste generated in the European Union (7 –10% measured by weight), it
is amongst the most complex ones to manage ( Malinauskaite et al.,
2017 ). In particular, according to OECD (2016) the municipal waste is
deﬁned as the household waste and waste similar in nature and compo-
sition to household waste. Its mixed and dispersed nature typically
makes it dif ﬁcult to treat ( European Parliament, 2017b ). Amongst
these kinds of wastes, food waste is potentially the largest un-tapped re-cyclable component of the municipal waste stream. Food waste accord-
ing to Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nation ( FAO,
2011 ) refers to the decrease in the quantity or quality of food resulting
from decisions and actions by retailers, food service providers and con-
sumers. It represents a growing problem in our society with almost
88 million tons of waste were generated every year. In particular, this
implies that valuable and often scarce resources such as water, soil,
and energy are being lost, and that climate change is being affected. At
worldwide level, only 6.3% of food waste is diverted towards land ﬁlls
and incinerators for composting. It represents 22% of discarded munici-
pal waste ( European Parliament, 2017b ). In addition, as acknowledged
by the Waste Framework Directive ( European Parliament, 2018 ), sets
a target of 50% of municipal waste to be recycled and prepared for
reuse by 2020 in EU Member States. The Directive identi ﬁes the
recycling actions (material recycling, composting and digestion) as a
strategic drivers and strengths of the CE policy in Europe. Minelgait ė
and Liobikien ė(2019) focused on the importance of reducing, reusing,
and recycling behaviors as effective tools for solving the waste problem
in the European Union, and pointed out that the countries seeking to
minimize waste generation should also pay more attention to the pro-
motion of ef ﬁcient consumption and production patterns. Despite
their importance, these actions alone do not ensure the transition to-
wards a total circularity. Winkler, 2011 (2011) reinforces this concept,
identifying two structural barriers to the improvement the circularity
in terms of product reuse. The ﬁrst barrier is that a large part of the
used materials is still accumulated as in-use stocks, and the second is
that a large amount of unrecycled materials is sent to land ﬁll. Reusing
used materials as raw materials (second raw material) is another strate-
gic cornerstone. Considering that the rates for some materials are al-
ready high, considerable improvements still seem possible ( Iacovidou
et al., 2017a ;Horodytska et al., 2018 ;Hahladakis and Iacovidou,2 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729 (2020) 138142