rgy consumption, Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and CO 2
emissions has been extensively performed10(Lozano and Gutierrez,
2008 ;Magazzino, 2016 ;Magazzino and Cerulli, 2019 ;Sarkodie, 2021 ).
Being of central importance in growth theory and providing far-
reaching policy implications, linking waste-GDP and GDP-
environmental pollution data in a unique estimation model can repre-
sent a fruitful research direction. If it is con ﬁrmed that GHG emissions
from the waste sector are both driven by per capita MSW and income,
then focusing on these key factors would help policymakers mitigating
global warming. Reciprocally, if income is identi ﬁed as the main deter-
minant of waste generation, then adequate measures can be imple-
mented. Accordingly, this is where our paper ﬁnds the ﬁrst of its ﬁve
contributions.
Looking with closer scrutiny, most published works have focused on
large groups of advanced economies (EU, OECD) including often hetero-
geneous panel members in a single estimation. Due to the well-known
waste data constraint,11it is not clear that the results obtained based
on wide income groups can be generalized for each member. Besides,
OECD and EU datasets may differ depending on the national waste clas-
siﬁcations ( Johnstone and Labonne, 2004 ). Yet, the knowledge on MSW
with readily available waste statistics allow for single-country
analysis.12While never studied in previous research, analysing the
waste sector in Denmark stands as the second contribution of the pres-
ent work.
Third, studies on the waste sector remain sporadic and limited de-
spite its signi ﬁcant global warming contributor. The Sustainable devel-
opment goal 12 accentuates the importance of sustainable production
and consumption ( United Nations, 2015 ), hence, a part of the debate
on Sustainable Development (SD) should focus on waste management.
Accordingly, this paper follows Domingos et al. (2017) and contributes
to the literature in analysing the waste sector.
A fourth novelty aspect is methodological. This research relies on a
Machine Learning (ML) methodology through the Arti ﬁcial Neural Net-
works (ANNs). Our empirical approach differs from the great majority
of existing analyses on this topic. Nonetheless, the few studies that
used ML models on waste data failed to include additional variables
within a multivariate predictive causality framework ( Kannangara
et al., 2018 ;Meza et al., 2019 ;Pan et al., 2019 ). Beyond a simple fore-
casting purpose, the present study relies on an innovative algorithm to
perform a strong causal analysis among multiple variables.
Finally, urbanization is included as an additional explanatory factor
to land and air degradation. This last original aspect is based on the
household utility maximization proposed by Kinnaman and Fullerton
(1997) . The authors identi ﬁed a vector of demographic characteristics
towards which the use of household MSW is dependent, and notably
the fact to live in urban areas or not. Then, Johnstone and Labonne
(2004) adapted this model with macroeconomic data to assess the de-
terminants of MSW generation for 30 OECD countries. To do so, they
rely on the proportion of the urban population. A more urbanized pop-
ulation is said to exert growing pressure on urban resources and envi-
ronment ( Kasman and Duman, 2015 ;Magazzino and Cerulli, 2019 ).
Undoubtedly, this factor is thought to be a non-negligible driver of
MSW generation and GHG emissions. Hence, there is a point in incorpo-
rating it within our framework.Overall, this paper aims at performing an in-depth assessment on
Denmark: a case study characterized by a promising (but fragile) path
to MSW sustainability. With ﬁve distinct novelty aspects, this research
seeks to contribute to the literature. We exploit the most recent and
available data period (1994 –2018) and investigate the causal relation-
ship between per capita GDP, urbanization, MSW generation per capita,
and GHG emissions from the waste sector in Denmark. FollowingMagazzino et al. (2020a) , this study applies two independent empirical
strategies: a time-series analysis (the Breitung-Candelon Spectral
Granger-causality test) and a Machine Learning approach (Arti ﬁcial
Neural Networks experiments), useful for policy formulation.
Besides this introduction, the remainder of the paper is organized as
follows. Section 2 presents the literature. Section 3 introduces and de-
scribes the data and methodology employed. Section 4 shows the em-
pirical results and discussion of the results. Finally, Section 5 provides
concluding remarks and careful policy recommendations.
2. Literature review
The literature on the relationship between economic activity and en-
vironmental degradation can be divided into two main components.
Theﬁrst focuses on the economic growth-environmental pollution
nexus (mainly carbon dioxide (CO
2) emissions). The second concen-
trates on the link between economic growth and land degradation
(i.e., waste generation). In the third part, this review highlights studies
on green supply processes and a speci ﬁc focus is made on waste treat-
ment within circular models. Being nonetheless exhaustive, this survey
emphasizes the suitability of assessing the Danish case and shed light on
the key gaps in the literature.
2.1. Economic growth-environmental pollution nexus
As mentioned previously, the relationship between economic activ-
ity and environmental pollution has been abundantly studied using the
EKC framework. The origins of this assessment can be traced back to the
seminal study from Grossman and Krueger (1991) . When con ﬁrmed,
this hypothesis claims that environmental pollution would ﬁrst increase
with income, and then decreases as GDP grows and technological prog-
ress emerges ( Rothman and De Bruyn, 1998 ;Lee et al., 2016 ). From a
policy standpoint, it is of high interest to know what relation character-
izes the GDP-CO 2emissions nexus for a country ( Magazzino and Cerulli,
2019 ). Despite abundant empirical examinations, studies differ from
each other in terms of methodologies, time periods, and samples
(Acaravci and Ozturk, 2010 ;Bowden and Payne, 2009 ;Bilgili et al.,
2016 ). This review focuses on our country of interest: Denmark. Since
the economic growth-waste generation nexus is the explicit aim ofthis paper, we select the only relevant information related to previous
GDP-environmental pollution investigations. Nonetheless, an extensive
overview can be found in Bilgili et al. (2016) .
13
The EKC is validated in Acaravci and Ozturk (2010) for 19 European
(EU) countries (including Denmark), and using Autoregressive Distrib-
uted Lag (ARDL) bounds cointegration analysis ( Pesaran and Shin,
1998 ;Pesaran et al., 2001 ) and Error Correction Model (ECM). Subse-
quently, the EKC is supported in Ben Jebli et al. (2013) for 25 OECD (Or-
ganization for Economic Cooperation and Development) countries
(including Denmark). While results provided little evidence supporting
the existence of the EKC hypothesis for Artic countries ( Baek, 2015 ),
Bilgili et al. (2016) conﬁrmed the EKC hypothesis for 17 OECD countries
(including Denmark), through Fully Modi ﬁed Ordinary Least Squares
(FMOLS) and Dynamic Ordinary Least Squares (DOLS) estimations.
Overall, despite not explicitly providing support for the EKC hypothesis,
Saidi and Hammami (2015) showed that CO 2emissions have a strong10Outside the waste framework, the empirical relationship between GDP, CO2 emissions
and various sources of energy has been extensively tested. See Pao and Tsai (2011) ;Tiwari
(2011) ,Farhani and Ben Rejeb (2012) ;Magazzino (2014) ;Kasman and Duman (2015) ;
Munir et al. (2020) for the relevant literature on this topic, which is not the explicit aim
of this paper.
11The literature lacks single-country case studies mainly because of the data constraint.
Waste classi ﬁcations may vary across countries and care must be taken when working
with data reported before the 1990s. For an interesting discussion on the data quality issuerelated to the waste sector, see Mazzanti et al. (2006) .
12Beforehand, Mazzanti (2008) used the information available at that time and investi-
gated the waste-GDP nexus for 15 EU countries. Due to a time-limited dataset(1997 –2001), the authors stated that his research would only provide “preliminary evi-
dence ”. Hence, the current available statistics allow us to make a step forward here.13Broad critical surveys are also presented in Dasgupta et al. (2002) ,Dinda (2004) ,a n d
Stern (2004) .C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755 (2021) 142510
3