g of baby nappies or diapers ’,‘recovery of nutrients from baby
nappies ’,‘phosphorus recovery from baby nappies ’,‘composting of
baby nappies ’,‘sustainable management baby nappies ’and ‘circular
economy of baby nappies ’. Through a quick reading of the title and ab-
stract (if needed) for each article, we have initially screened 45 journal
articles from around the world that somewhat addressed the recycling
of baby nappies, and ﬁnally, we have selected 22 studies following the
below criteria to perform a thorough review:
i) The article adequately assessed/explained a particular technol-
ogy or method for recycling baby nappies or resource recovery
from baby nappies.
ii) The article published in peer-reviewed journals in English be-
tween 2010 and 2020 that captured the recent advancement in
recycling of baby nappies.
iii) Information necessary to perform the current review is possible
to extract and organize in a systematic order.
2.2.2. Approach for extraction of key information from selected literature
To perform an in-depth and systematic review, we have developed a
methodical approach that allows extracting all key information from the
selected articles for this review. In this approach, we have initially dis-
sected each journal articles into three major parts i. Purpose and meth-
odology, ii. ﬁndings/results and discussion, and iii. recommendations
and future research needs, and did careful reading of each part to extract
the key information. We eventually came up with a tabular structure
with a number of columns with headings i.e., ‘recovery/recycling tech-
nology or method used ’,‘location of the study ’,‘considerations for
recycling (nutrient recovery/minimizing waste volume) ’,‘extent of ap-
plication (lab/pilot project/industry scale) ’,‘positive/bene ﬁcial aspect ’
and ‘limitations ’that allowed to systematically capture the key informa-
tion from each of the selected article.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Quantitative picture of national P loss through baby nappies in
Australia
Each year, around 2 billion disposable baby nappies are used in
Australia that eventually ends up in land ﬁlls (ABC News, 2015 ), with
traditional disposable baby nappies estimated to take up to 150 years
to break down ( Sustainability Victoria, 2021 ). The human excreta
(urine and feces) that ends up through baby nappies in Australian land-
ﬁll also cause the emission of methane, a greenhouse gas that is 21 times
more potent than Carbon dioxide. By weight, nearly 75% of the used
baby nappies is urine ( Colón et al., 2011 ), containing a considerable
amount of P ( Mihelcic et al., 2011 ). Thus, a substantial amount of
human excreta bound P and other nutrients (e.g., nitrogen) also ends
up in land ﬁlls through disposal of used baby nappies. Although a num-
ber of city councils (local government administrative bodies) in
Australia currently offer rebates to households that switch to cloth
nappies from disposable baby nappies mainly with the aim to reduce
the amount of wastes reaching to land ﬁlls (Cook, 2021 ), initiatives for
the recovery and recycling of P and other nutrients from disposable
baby nappies are still lacking.
Theﬁrst substance ﬂow analysis of P relating to disposable baby
nappies in Australia as performed in this study indicates that nearly
308 t of P ended up in land ﬁll areas in 2019, which accounts for approx-
imately 2.5% of the overall P (12,507 t) excreted as human waste in that
year ( Fig. 1 ). Although the amount looks small in percentage term for a
single year, if not recovered and recycled through a circular economy
approach, this could result in the loss of a signi ﬁcant amount of P over
a longer term. The multi-year analysis of P loss through baby nappies
as presented in Fig. 2 indicates that over the period of 2001 –2019,
nearly 5452 t of P was lost in land ﬁll areas of Australia. Considering P
is a non-substitutable, non-renewable/ ﬁnite, and geographicallyrestricted resources and the urgency of closing the loops in the global
P cycle ( Cordell et al., 2009 ;Chowdhury et al., 2017 ), recovering and
recycling that amount of P is essential. Moreover, considering the asso-
ciated life cycle environmental impacts ( Ng et al., 2013 ;Cordella et al.,
2015 ), systematic recycling of disposable baby nappies is much re-
quired. Although the application of circular economy approaches for
recycling baby nappies is underway ( Khoo et al., 2019 ;Mendoza et al.,
2019 ), it is essential to consider the perspective of P loss associated
with baby nappies and ﬁnding recycling techniques or methods effec-
tive in recovery of nutrients along with other elements. Compared to
other pathways of P ﬂoss mainly from the agricultural system such as
soil erosion and runoff loss, it is comparatively easier to track down
and manage P ﬂow associated with baby nappies as systematic collec-
tion of household wastes and recovery of P through formal municipal
waste management system is possible ( Rahman et al., 2019 ).
This study only presents the quantitative picture of P loss through
baby nappies in the case of Australia. However, other developed nations
with similar socio-economic conditions likely to have more or less sim-
ilar types and magnitudes of P loss through baby nappies. Utilizing the
conceptual model that present systems and system boundaries and
pathways of P ﬂow through baby nappies ( Fig. 1 ) as well as the methods
for calculation of P ﬂow as presented in this study, similar quantitative
assessments should be performed for other economically developed
countries where disposable baby nappies are commonly used. Accord-
ingly, it is required to perform a SFA for quantifying the total global P
loss through baby nappies, which could be done in our future study.
Currently, there is a clear knowledge gap in this regard.
3.2. Review of available technologies/methods for recycling disposable baby
nappies
The review of available published peer-reviewed journal articles on
various baby nappy recycling technologies/methods as presented in
Table 1 helped to understand the potential and limitations in terms of
P and other nutrient recovery.
3.2.1. Technologies/methods suitable for nutrient recycling
A number of studies attempted to understand the potential for
recycling baby nappies through composting with food and other organic
wastes. For instance, Tsigkou et al. (2020a) examined the potential for
composting of anaerobic sludge from the co-digestion of used dispos-
able nappies and expired food products, while Colón et al. (2011)
assessed the potential for composting of nappies with source-
separated organic fraction of municipal solid waste (OFMSW). Although
both composting methods were found quite suitable for nutrient recov-
ery, they have some bene ﬁcial aspects and limitations as presented in
Table 1 . For instance, the composting method of Tsigkou et al. (2020a)
identi ﬁed inability to eliminate harmful bacteria like Salmonella and En-
terococcus spp. due to low composting temperature as one of the limi-
tations, while the study of Colón et al. (2011) found slightly higher
concentration of zinc as the shortcoming.
In an experiment of composting of door-to-door collected organic
fraction of municipal solid waste with a 3% w/w (weight per weight)
of compostable nappies in Barcelona, Spain, Colón et al. (2013) identi-
ﬁed that both the composting process and the ﬁnal compost product
are not altered by the use of compostable nappies in some important as-
pects like the content of pathogen, stability and elemental (e.g., nutrient
and heavy metal) composition. Although they suggested the use of
compostable nappies as a real alternative to disposable nappies with
no technical issues, they emphasized on the need for a complete life
cycle assessment (LCA) of all the processes to assess the sustainability
and environmental impact. Another study of the Municipality of Coroico
in Bolivia, where the organic fraction (fecal residues and cellulosic poly-
mers) is separated from the plastic part and composted that with locally
available components like cow dung, activated bacteria, and Californian
red earthworms. Although this was the ﬁrst approach for utilizingR.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799 (2021) 149339
4