: steering solutions 
Following our theoretical model, the research results confirm that 
municipalities identify the circular economy mostly as waste manage -
ment and seek to contribute as much as defined by the legal framework. 
Hence, knowledge about the circular economy is uncertain (Voβ et al., 
2007 ), and this hinders the implementation of the circular economy on a 
wider scale. Historical functions of municipalities, that is, waste col-
lecting and waste recycling, limit implementation of circular solutions 
(Termeer and Metze, 2019 ). 
In line with Johansson and Henriksson ’s (2020) study about circu-
larity shifts in Swedish environmental policy, an identified problem is 
also the lock-in of legislation in the linear economy. For example, ac-
cording to the legal acts, RATC cannot deliver waste directly to Table 3 
Summary of results.  
Elements of theoretical frame Axial codes Sub-codes Definition 
Challenges for implementing 
the circular economy Gaps (uncertain knowledge, 
ambivalence) Municipal waste 
management Problems related to the waste management, such as low quality of sorting, lack of 
motivation to sort, bulky waste, etc. 
Textile waste Problems related to the textile waste, such as lack of collecting infrastructure, lack of 
information, etc. 
Local business Problems related to the local business (e.g. insufficient business environmental 
responsibility, waste generation management accounting system [GPAIS] problems, 
problems of waste from illegal businesses, etc.). 
Key stakeholders (distributed 
power, uncertain knowledge) Human resources Problems related to the distribution of human resources at local governance. 
Networking Collaboration between municipalities, RATC, and stakeholders (such as residents, 
academia, waste management companies, etc.). 
Steering solutions Drivers Education and 
publicity Citizens ’ education (training, courses, etc.) and environmental publicity initiatives. 
Provision of 
infrastructure Infrastructure which helps ensure the implementation of the circular economy, such as 
deposit system, battery collection system, purchasing of equipment.  L. Dagilien le et al.