to visualise local material cycles we also added to the
diagram the ﬂows of the secondary waste from incineration (i.e.
bottom ash, ﬂy ash, metal residues etc.) and ﬂows of secondary
raw materials (recovered materials like sorted PET) produced in
Brussels. The numerical tables behind the Sankey are given in sup-
plement 3.
2.6. Waste performance indicators
To measure and compare the waste performance of the city’s
sectors, the two indicators ‘waste production intensity’ and ‘waste
treatment intensity’ are chosen, because they measure two impor-
tant aspects of a sector’s performance: the sector’s waste (in)efﬁ-
ciency in terms of amount of waste and type of treatment. The
waste production intensity reﬂects the sector’s production (in)efﬁ-
ciency and is expressed as a ratio between waste and production. It
is calculated by dividing each component of the waste supply table
wðsÞkj(see 2.2) by the economic activity output xjfrom Brussels’
supply table. The waste intensity is measured in ton per M €sector
output.
In order to take into account not only the amounts of generated
waste, but also the type of treatment, the waste treatment inten-
sity is used as second indicator. It refers to the amount of wasteproduced by a sector (in ton) that is sent to a speciﬁc treatment
(for example to incineration or recycling). It is calculated by divid-
ing each component of the supply to treatment table ws tðÞ
ij(2.4)
by the economic activity output xjfrom Brussels’ supply table.
The waste treatment intensity is also measured in ton per M €sec-
tor output. Since the economic sector output is only available for
2010, the waste coefﬁcients are calculated for 2010.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Waste ﬂow analysis3.1.1. Waste supply and use tables
The results of the waste supply table for Brussels are shown in
Table 7 . The ten waste types are broad categories containing differ-
ent ‘product’ types produced by households and economic activi-
ties. For example, ‘glass’ includes ﬂat glass from end of life
vehicles and from C&D activities, but also packaging glass disposed
by households and the hotels and restaurant sector. The category
‘inert’ contains concrete, bricks, tiles and ceramics, inert mixture,
asphalt, soil and stones. The category ‘other’ is a mixed fraction
consisting mostly of ‘complex packaging’, ‘ﬁne particles’ or ‘street
cleaning residues’.
The total amount of waste collected in 2014 is around 1.5 mil-
lion tons, from which 71% is generated by economic activities and29% by households. Table 7 shows that households are the most
important contributor for glass, food, textile and garden waste,
while inert, metal and paper and cardboard are mainly produced
by economic activities.
The sector-speciﬁc results are too detailed to be reproduced
here, but available in the supplementary material (supplement
4). The results show that only for inert waste a large share (31%
of inert waste) can be aligned to one particular sector, the con-
struction sector. For the other waste types, the amounts are more
widely distributed over economic activities. For example, for paper
waste, the public administration, ﬁnancial intermediation and the
other business services have a share of 15%, 11% and 9% respec-
tively and the remaining part is distributed over 62 economic
activities.
When discussing the quality of this detailed sector repartition,
we point to the following sources of uncertainties: First, for certain
sectors the local economic output speciﬁed in the supply table
could be higher than their real production (so called ‘head quarter
problem’) and second, the national waste intensity could under- or
overestimate the regional waste intensity. Previous comparison
between estimations based on waste coefﬁcient approach and sta-
tistical data ( Zeller et al., 2018 ) have shown that uncertainties
occur mainly for metals, glass and inert waste.
Table 8 shows the amount of waste used in the local waste
treatment facilities (i.e. input capacities) and the amount of waste
exported to waste treatment facilities located out of Brussels.
Around 770 kt of waste (50% of the total) is treated in Brussels,
the remaining 50% is directly exported. Regarding the data quality,
it has to be mentioned that the totals for incineration and compost-
ing represent accurate numbers measured by the treatment facili-
ties, while the quantity for the ‘preparation for material recovery’sector and the detailed, waste-type speciﬁc inputs represents esti-
mations obtained from the sources previously described ( Agence
Bruxelles Proprété (ABP), 2016 ; Bruxelles Propreté, 2016;
RECYDATA, 2017, 2014 ).
Table 9 is the waste supply to treatment table that shows
treatment- and sector-speciﬁc results. Most waste collected from
households is used in the local treatment facilities while waste col-
lected from economic activities is mainly exported. The treatment
options ‘export to incineration, unknown, landﬁll and compost’
occur for waste from economic activities only. These variations in
treatment between economic activities and the household sector
result from the different collection schemes and actors (public/pri-
vate) responsible for the collection of waste. When comparing the
amount of waste sent to the local ‘preparation of material recovery’
sector and to the local incinerator, indicated in Table 9 , with the
corresponding data from Table 8 , we ﬁnd that the calculated
amounts in Table 9 are slightly lower than the ones ‘measured’
in the use tables. This indicates that incineration rates and materialTable 6
Waste supply to treatment table.
HH = Households, EA = Economic activity.89 V. Zeller et al. / Waste Management 83 (2018) 83–94