e or impede environmental governance in cities. The
framework consists of 27 indicators across nine conditions and
three dimensions ( Table 1 ). The “knowing ”dimension addresses
the need to be aware, understand and learn about the risks and
impacts of environmental challenges, policy and strategic choices.
The “wanting ”dimension examines the willingness of stakeholders
to cooperate, express and act upon their ambitions and commit to
using their capabilities to ﬁnd solutions. The “enabling ”dimension
considers the network, resources and instruments that stake-
holders have available to realize their ambitions ( Koop et al., 2017 ).
The GCF approach was selected for two key reasons. First, the
GCF is derived from an extensive knowledge base on how norma-
tive principles, enabling efforts and adaptive capacity can be used
to overcome governance gaps and barriers that result from inef-
fective policy actions ( Koop et al., 2017 ). Second, since this paper
aims to provide insights that may apply beyond the case study it-
self, using the GCF's standardized triangulation approach provides
the opportunity for reproducibility and comparability with other
cases. This can serve as a basis for systematic research in the ﬁeld of
governance for the CE in urban areas of low-income and middle-
income countries. Previous case studies that applied the frame-work focused on governance challenges relating to the water sector
and were largely in cities outside Africa (e.g. Brockhoff et al., 2019 ;
Feingold et al., 2018 ;Kim et al., 2018 ;Koop et al., 2018 ;/C20Steﬂov/C19a
et al., 2018 ). In this study, the GCF is applied to the CE in a
context that involves multiple sectors connected to resource re-
covery from organic waste streams.
For Naivasha, we followed the prescribed methodological
approach by Koop et al. (2017) but modi ﬁed the information about
the indicators to re ﬂect the multi-sectoral context. After developing
pre-de ﬁned questions for the 27 indicators, we conducted a desk
study with a focus on reviewing scienti ﬁc and gray literature related
to sanitation, waste management and resource recovery in Naivasha.
Some literature came from online sources, while local stakeholders
provided other documents. The desk study was guided by the pre-
deﬁned questions (provided in the Supplementary Material) and itresulted in preliminary information and scores on the indicators.
We then conducted a stakeholder identi ﬁcation exercise
through a desk study and suggestions by local partners which
resulted in a comprehensive list of potential stakeholders to involve
in interviews. We categorized the stakeholders into various roles,
types and stage of the sanitation and waste service chain such as
waste generation, collection and transport, treatment and disposal/
end-use, to allow selection of a diverse set of interviewees. Cate-
gories of stakeholder types included national public authorities,
local public authorities, private sector, research &innovation in-
stitutions, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) &cluster or-
ganizations, citizens and user groups. Selection of interviewees
focused on those primarily based in Naivasha. Since some of thoserequested were not able to participate in the interviews, the se-
lection was done iteratively. Altogether, we conducted interviews
with 21 stakeholders. The list of stakeholders represented among
the interviewees and details about their categorization is provided
in the Supplementary Material.
Each interviewee consented before participating and all in-
terviews were recorded in audio except for two instances where
the interviewees declined. The interviews typically occurred at theinterviewee's place of work and lasted between 30 to 90 min. The
interviews were of semi-structured format with the pre-de ﬁned
questions guiding the discussion and follow-up questions posed
to enable the interviewees to further substantiate their statements.
Rather than responding to questions for all the indicators, each
interview focused on the indicators most connected to the inter-
viewee's expertise and experience. Afterwards, a summary of each
interviewee's responses was made and sent to the interviewee so
that they could provide feedback and necessary corrections as well
as any further substantiation related to the indicators. Half of the
interviewees provided feedback but half had not by the time of
analysis. The feedback provided was integrated and then responses
from all interviewees for each indicator were combined with the
information from the desk study into a summary drawing out
highlights for each indicator. From the summary, scores were
Table 1
The Governance Capacity Framework. Together the dimensions, conditions and indicators are considered to determine the overall governance capacit yt o
address a resource challenge ( Koop et al., 2017 ).
Dimensions Conditions Indicators
Knowing 1 Awareness 1.1 Community knowledge
1.2 Local sense of urgency1.3 Behavioural internalization
2 Useful knowledge 2.1 Information availability
2.2 Information transparency2.3 Knowledge cohesion
3 Continuous learning 3.1 Smart monitoring
3.2 Evaluation
3.3 Cross-stakeholder learning
Wanting 4 Stakeholder engagement process 4.1 Stakeholder inclusiveness
4.2 Protection of core values4.3 Progress and variety of options
5 Management ambition 5.1 Ambitious and realistic management
5.2 Discourse embedding
5.3 Management cohesion
6 Agents of change 6.1 Entrepreneurial agents
6.2 Collaborative agents6.3 Visionary agents
Enabling 7 Multi-level network potential 7.1 Room to manoeuvre
7.2 Clear division of responsibilities7.3 Authority
8 Financial viability 8.1 Affordability
8.2 Consumer willingness-to-pay
8.3 Financial continuation
9 Implementing capacity 9.1 Policy instruments
9.2 Statutory compliance9.3 PreparednessD. Ddiba et al. / Earth System Governance xxx (xxxx) xxx 3
Please cite this article as: Ddiba, D et al., Governing the circular economy: Assessing the capacity to implement resource-oriented sanitation and
waste management systems in low- and middle-income countries, Earth System Governance, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esg.2020.100063