aneghem et al.
1 3
the amount of litter that is not collected and accumulated in 
the different environmental compartments is probably much higher.
The discussion above only considers Europe. On a global 
level, 40% of MSW is disposed of in landfills, 19% is recy -
cled or composted, and 11% is recovered in WtE plants. The remaining 33% of MSW is littered or openly dumped (Kaza et al. 2018). Waste management varies considerably by income and region. Open dumping predominantly pre-vails in low-income countries, where about 93% of the waste is openly burned or dumped on roads and open land or in waterways. As the income of a country increases, a first step towards more sustainable waste management is construction and use of landfills, whereas only middle- and high-income countries apply recycling, composting and WtE (Kaza et al. 2018). This evolution in waste management can be illustrated by the case of China: in 1980 the MSW collection rate in this country was only about 30% and waste management consisted mainly of open dumping. In 2003, the MSW collection rate had increased to 70% and about 85% of the collected waste was landfilled, 10% composted, and 5% incinerated. By 2013, the MSW collection rate had increased to 90%, with 68% of the collected MSW landfilled, 2% composted or recycled, and 30% incinerated. The number of WtE plants increased from 47 in 2003 to 166 in 2013 with a corresponding increase in incineration capacity from 3.7 × 10
6 to 46.34 × 106 t per year 
(Zhang et al. 2015). A next step in China’s waste manage-ment policy is the introduction of separate collection and recycling (Zhang et al. 2015). Nevertheless, the statement that high-income countries apply recycling, composting and WtE may not hold true for all developed countries. In the USA for instance, 34.7% of the generated MSW is recycled or composted, 12.8% is treated in WtE plants, and the remaining 52.5% is still landfilled (US Environmental Protection Agency 2018). So, although the USA is higher in the GDP per capita list than all but a few western European countries (Interna -
tional Monetary Fund 2018), landfill remains the most applied MSW treatment option. Yet, also in the USA, there is a trend towards more recycling and WtE, although less pronounced than in the western European countries: the percentage of MSW that is recycled increased from 9.6% in 1980 to 25.8% in 2015, and the share of WtE increased from less than 2% to 12.8% over the same period of time.
WtE, and by extension high‑temperature 
combustion, e.g. in a dedicated rotary kiln, 
is essential to keep toxic substances out of materials 
and out of the environment
Toxic substances in recycled materials
Special attention has to be paid to the dissipation of toxic 
substances in recycled materials, instead of focusing only on maintaining materials in circulation as long as possible. This can be illustrated by the example of bisphenol A (BPA) in recycled paper. BPA is added as a colour developer in ther -
mal paper, commonly used for example sales receipts. Due to its oestrogenic properties, BPA is considered an endocrine disruptor and is classified as a category 3 reproductive toxic substance, meaning it is alarming for human fertility (Geens et al. 2012a). Dermal contact to paper is recognized as one 
of the human exposure routes to BPA (Geens et al. 2012b). In Europe, paper is recycled on average 3.5 times, and about 50% of the raw material for the pulp and paper industry is used paper (CEPI 2013). As thermal paper is typically 
collected together with other waste paper, it is introduced in the paper recycling loop and this way BPA is dissipated over a variety of paper products. This was confirmed by Pivnenko et al. (2015), who showed that in Danish paper and board samples, the BPA concentration ranged from 0.3 to 480 µg/g. They pointed out that recycling of waste paper was the main source of BPA contamination in paper products, which is sustained by the chemical and physical properties of BPA. An interesting general conclusion of this study was that mass-based recycling targets do not ensure high-quality recycled materials, as was already discussed in Section “ WtE combusts (or should combust) only waste that 
is non-recyclable for economic, technical or environmental reasons”.
A recent report issued by the European Commission 
acknowledges that the collection and recycling targets in the European waste legislation merely focus on increasing the amounts of recycled materials, not on their quality regarding the absence of toxic substances (Goldenman et al. 2017). 
The report also states that no quality standards exist for toxic substances in recycled materials (as well as virgin materi-als), except for the end-of-waste criteria, which exist only for a few material types. Hence, the European legislation in place does not encourage activities to decontaminate waste or recycled materials.
Another type of pollutants possibly present in materi-
als are the persistent organic pollutants (POPs). Because of their particular combination of physical and chemical prop-erties, they remain intact for many years or even decades once released into the environment. As a consequence, they become widely distributed over the different environmen-tal compartments, where they constitute a chronic source of exposure for plants and animals and also for humans, directly or indirectly. The toxic effects of POPs, typically accumulat-ing in fatty tissue, include cancer, allergies, damage to the nervous system, endocrine disruption and developmental effects (Li et al. 2006). The Stockholm convention, which entered into force in 2004, currently lists 26 POPs whose production and use is eliminated or reduced or for which measures have to be taken to reduce unintentional release. Listed POPs include insecticides such as DDT, industrial