HISTORY 17
Second World Wars constituted periods in which warring nations intensified waste reclama -
tion for the purpose of war-making. What then makes the Nazi waste exploitation regime 
– as I have termed it in this article – so specific?
In contrast to other national war-time waste mobilisation programmes (Denton & Weber, 
2021), the Nazi waste exploitation regime set in well before the war. In the initial years, 
intensifying waste salvage was linked to the Nazi autarky goals and it was entangled with 
Nazi ideology and totalitarian rule. Over time, the nascent Nazi waste exploitation regime 
became part and parcel of racist Nazi ideology, the regime’s territorial expansion as well as 
its exploitation and extermination strategies.
At the level of rhetoric and propaganda, the Nazi waste exploitation regime was driven 
by material efficiency and the idea of mobilising waste as a resource. But the rigorous inter -
ventions into the existing waste trade and its reverse logistics caused manifold conflicts and 
disruptions, inefficiencies as well as additional waste work. The Aryanisation of the rag-and-
bone trade undermined given expertise and trading networks; the diverse parallel waste 
collecting efforts to approach the Nazi ‘total’ recovery ideal were cost- and labour-intensive 
and only operable by exploiting volunteer as much as forced waste work.
At the core of the Nazi waste exploitation regime lay a rigid ideological claim, namely, to 
set up a ‘lossless’ material economy which would expand the Reich’s resource base, even if 
additional municipal and national funds were needed and the given infrastructures of munic -
ipal waste services or the rag-and-bone trade were exhausted for that purpose. The German 
Volk was asked to participate in waste salvage as a form of voluntary sacrifice to demonstrate 
loyalty to the nation, its order, and its prosperity, while Jews and other socially expelled 
individuals were forced to do the dirty waste sorting work. The Nazi salvage methods were 
imposed on occupied economies, and concentration and extermination camps eventually 
figured as hubs in the reverse logistics of waste collection and salvage. While the Japanese 
case shows some parallels (Denton, 2021), the latter refrained from the racist and ideolo -
gy-driven murderous purge inside the waste workforce that characterised the Nazi case.
Like wartime waste salvage efforts elsewhere, the Nazi waste exploitation regime 
generated familiar paradoxes. Wartime shortages and rationing caused quantities and 
qualities of waste material to shrink, and while still surprisingly vast amounts were 
tediously collected and sorted by voluntary and forced labour, large proportions never 
made it back into production due to the manifold challenges of the reverse logistics 
such as declining material qualities, lacking manpower, and insufficient transport and 
processing facilities. Moreover, the Nazi vision of closing the material loop stood in stark 
contrast to the wartime situations in households, industry, or the waste trade, but even 
more so, to the destructive power and murdering of the German Reich and the waste -
fulness of war.
Past studies on the question of the Nazis’ ‘greenness’ have shown that nature conservation 
and environmental protection, though regularly propagated, were rigidly subordinated to 
the objectives of autarkic economy and war-making, for instance, in the case of German 
forestry (Brüggemeier et al., 2005; Maier, 1992; uekötter, 2006). The same is true for waste 
recovery. Considering the named losses, disruptions, perversities, and the contexts of war 
and exploitation, a discussion on the potential ‘effectiveness, ’ ‘success, ’ or even the sustain-
ability of Nazi waste salvage is pointless altogether, even if recycling quotas – as we would 
call the share of secondary resources inside production today – were enhanced. By contrast, 
the role of waste salvage for the Nazi economy and the mobilisation of the German people