re-proof
5 
 first one considers  the variable  definitions of food waste , and therefore  the possibility of  
developing  coherent regulatory  metrics for quantification  (accounting).  Actual glob al losses 
are an estimate (Parfitt et al., 2010) . The existing data include high uncertainty (Corrado et 
al., 2019)  and different scopes for measurement s, making extrapolation and comparison of 
data very challenging.   
The second challenge lies in a failure to  distinguish food waste into appropriate categories 
that could be linked with a corresponding waste hierarchy. The current waste hierarchy is not 
properly distinguishing terminology in accordance with sustainable management. The terms 
used in the hierarchy  do not have a clear scope  and are often used as synonyms, such as  ―food 
loss‖ and ―food surplus‖, ―recycling‖  and ―reuse‖ , ―recycling‖  and ―recovery‖  (UNEP, 2014;  
Bernstad Saraiva Schott et al., 2013) . A food  waste hierarchy distinguishing food surplus and 
waste, but not clear end-of-life (EoL) pathways,  was proposed by  Papargyropoulou et al. 
(2014) , while Garcia -Garcia et al. (2017)  expanded EoL the most , but with no distinctions of 
surplus, waste and loss , and U.S. EPA classified industrial use in their hierarchy (Dou et al., 
2016) . Although there is  an agreement on the prevention  and avoidance of disposal, there is a 
continuing discussion and confusion in other EoL treatments.  There is a need for  clarification 
and harmonization combining feedstock specifics , surplus food, and  food waste as a 
secondary resource and its EoL treatments . As waste hierarchy is used in policies, this lack of 
clarity can result in  regulation s that are not aligned, such as European marketing standards 
that lead to wastage of nutritious food  that could have been prevented  (Priefer et al., 2016) . 
In light of these issues, the goals of this article are as follows:  
1. Summarize current food waste terminology and definiti ons and propose a clear -
cutting categorization for the various types of food waste, losses and surpluses  Journal Pre-proof