UK London branch were conducted to examine current efforts
on new policy, operation status and limitations of the EPR systems in
EU. Statistical data such as national waste statistics published by the
Korea MOE, Japan and Eurostat in EU were analyzed to examine the
trends of plastic packaging waste generation and recycling. Material
flow analysis was conducted to elucidate quantitative flow of plastic
packaging by life cycle (i.e., production, consumption, collection and
sorting and recycling and treatment, and disposal). Table 1presents the
sources of data and relevant references for the analysis.
2.2. GHG reduction potentials by recycling and source reduction
The amounts of greenhouse gasses generated by incineration of
packaging waste and reduced by assuming it was recycled were cal-
culated by the US EPA WARM. The WARM is a tool that calculates the
GHG emissions, energy savings and economic impacts of baseline and
alternative waste management practices, including source reduction,
recycling, combustion, composting, and anaerobic digestion and land-
filling. GHG savings are calculated by comparing the emissions asso-
ciated with managing materials under an alternative scenario with theemissions associated with a baseline scenario (i.e., current practices), as
opposed to multiplying the quantity of materials managed by emission
factors (US EPA WARM). Not only recycling scenarios but also potential
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by source reduction scenarios
were calculated for estimating the potential reduction and summarized
the results. We also estimated economic profits from GHG gas reduction
by the scenarios based on market values in the emission trading scheme
in South Korea.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Production and consumption of packaging waste
Plastic production has been increasing worldwide as it is applicable
to many industries as well as daily household goods due to its out-
standing physical and chemical properties. A plastic manufacturing
industry belongs to petrochemical industry, and petrochemical industry
that produces synthetic resin, synthetic fiber raw material, synthetic
rubber and various basic chemical products from petroleum products or
natural gas as raw materials. A domestic demand for plastics (or syn-
thetic resins) in South Korea is shown in Fig. 1. The domestic demand
has been continually increased from 5.1 million in 2011 ton to 6.5
million ton in 2018 over the period. As of 2018, the most demanded
material among the resins is PP, followed by PVC, LDPE and HDPE.
Such synthetic resins are used for many industrial applications such
as packaging, building and construction, transportation, electronics and
electrical equipment, household consumer products, and textiles. A
comparison analysis of plastic consumption by industry type from the
world, Japan and South Korea was conducted, as shown in Fig. 2. The
largest consumption of plastics was found to be packaging applications.In Japan,more than 4 millionof plastic packaging andcontainers out ofapproximately 10 million ton (40.7%) were manufactured in 2017,
followed by electrical and electronics (1.9 million ton, 18.8%), auto-
mobiles (1.2 million ton, 12.1%), building and construction (1.19
million ton, 11.8%) in 2017 (Japan PWMI, 2019). In South Korea,
plastics were manufactured for packaging and containers (2.7 million
ton, 46.5%), building and construction materials (1.4 million ton,
24.7%), automobiles (528,000 ton, 9.1%), and household consumer
products (461,000 ton, 7.9%), electrical and electronics (396,000 ton,
6.8%), and agricultural and fishery products (293,000 ton, 5.0%) (KEI,
2019).
3.2. Consumptions of single-use plastic packaging
Plastic raw materials are sold and consumed by consumers as plastic
products such as various packaging materials and containers. Much of
plastic packaging is made of single-use plastics. Europe has been ac-
tively responding to the problem of single-use plastics, including a
regulatory policy based on the 10 most plastic wastes found on beaches
in Europe (European Commission, 2019; UNEP, 2018). According to a
previous study, plastic waste accounted for 82% of the total waste,
based on the result of monitoring waste on beaches in South Korea.
Plastic packaging materials such as beverage bottles, snack bags, plastic
bags, and styrofoam containers have been commonly found on coastal
lines (Korea Marine Litter Information System, 2019).
In this study, we collected basic data and estimated consumptions
for four types of single-use plastics (PET drinking bottles, single- useplastic cups, single-use plastic bags, and single-use plastic containers
and cutlery for food delivery) that are commonly used in plastic
packaging materials in South Korea. For estimates of single-use plastic
consumptions of selected four products, basic data such as consumption
amounts, consumption frequency, the sales of products and the number
of food delivery in the country were collected. By using such data,
material footprints of single-use plastics by the consumption for each
product were calculated. More detail data and calculation methods are
available in Supplementary Materials (Table S1 through S4). Table 2
shows the material footprints of single-use plastics in South Korea. Asshown in Table 2, approximately 32.6 billion units of single-use plastics
were consumed per year, 637.7 units with annual plastic consumption
per capita based on the four items. The single-use plastic consumption
per capita per year was 11.8 kg, resulting in 602,900 ton of single-use
plastic waste. It should be noted that the actual footprint may be much
higher than the calculated footprint because other than the four items
in this study, many single-use plastics can be included such as plastic
straws, colored PET bottles, carbonated beverage PET bottles, plastic
films, single-use razors and tooth brushes, and many others. As the
number of single-housing family is growing, the consumption of plastic
packaging materialsused forfood delivery maybe expected toincrease.Table 1
Methods for data collection and acquisition for material flow analysis of plastics in South Korea.
Life cycle Type of data References
Export/Import Export/Import of synthetic resin Korea Petrochemical Industry Association(KPIA), 2018
Production Amount of synthetic resin production Korea Petrochemical Industry Association(KPIA), 2018
Consumption Amount of domestic demands for synthetic resin Korea Petrochemical Industry Association(KPIA), 2018
Generation Amount of plastic waste Korea Ministry of Environment(MOE), 2018a
Collection and sorting Amount of collected waste by industrial type Korea Ministry of Environment(MOE), 2018a
Recycling & recovery Amount of material recycling (a) KEI, 2019
Amount of energy recovery (b) KEI, 2019
Total incineration (c) Korea Ministry of Environment(MOE), 2018a
Disposal Incineration without energy recovery (d) (d) = (c)-(a)-(b)
Amount of incineration without energy recovery Korea Ministry of Environment(MOE), 2018a
Amount of landfill Korea Ministry of Environment(MOE), 2018aY.-C. Jang, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 158 (2020) 104798
3