ion between the levels of government, a lack of horizontal
coordination between cities and a lack of public sector coordination
and support for private CE initiatives.
The current CE literature on cities and municipalities can be
divided into two primary lines of research. The ﬁrst line of literature
focuses on developing indicator systems to monitor and evaluate
the CE at a city level ( Avdiushchenko and Zajaç, 2019 ). The second
line of literature aims to compare and identify the similarities and
differences between projects, sectors and initiatives that are the
targets of cities in CE-related activities ( Bolger and Doyon, 2019 ;
Gravagnuolo et al., 2019 ;Obersteg et al., 2019 ). However, less
attention is given in the literature to exploring how cities and
municipalities collaborate with stakeholders to accelerate the
development of a CE and further research on municipal and city-
level governance is required to accelerate the transformation to a
circular economy. Consequently, this article aims to contribute to
closing this knowledge gap.
Cities and local governments can play an important role as
change agents to create sustainable cities ( Bulkeley and Betsill,
2005 ).Bolger and Doyon (2019) conducted a comparative study
of the cities of Malm €o and Melbourne to analyse how municipal
planning could support the transition to a CE and found that stra-
tegic urban planning could function as a vehicle for the trans-
formation of CE objectives into speci ﬁc actions. In attempting to
understand how the role of a strategic planner and change agent
unfolds, scholars have moved from focussing on hierarchical,
topedown-oriented command-and-control regulation, often
labelled “government ”, to a perspective focussing on non-
hierarchical modes of coordination and decision-making, termed
“governance ”(Bulkeley and Kern, 2006 ;Corfee-Morlot et al., 2009 ;
Zvolska et al., 2019 ).Bulkeley and Kern (2006) studied the role of
municipalities in climate change mitigation policies and developed
a typology for local governments, whereby actions could be divided
into four main modes of governance as described below. This ty-
pology based on the four roles can be applied to other areas of
municipal planning as well, although the speci ﬁc character of the
four modes of governance may differ. In a study of the sharing
economies in four Swedish cities, Palm et al. (2019) extended the
typology by adding “governing by partnership ”; however, this
could also be characterised as a sub-form of “governing by
enabling ”.Cavicchi et al. (2017) used the same framework to
analyse sustainability and bioenergy development in Emilia
Romagna, Italy. Based on Bulkeley and Kern (2006) , this paper
applies the following typology for the modes of governance:
1)Self-governance ,d eﬁned as the capacity of a municipality to
govern its own assets and activities. This mode of governance is
often described as governing the municipality as a company,
focussing on activities that take place within the legal bound-
aries of the municipal organisation.
2)Governing by provision ,d eﬁned as governance through the
provision of services and resources. This mode of governance
often involves governance through municipality-owned
agencies and companies in, for example, wastewater, utilities,
heating companies, transport companies and waste companies.
3)Governing by authority ,d eﬁned as governance using authority,
such as regulation. This mode of governance involves govern-
ing through rules and enforcement, including direct and eco-
nomic regulation (rules, taxes, tariffs, etc.), but also through
planning activities that are legally binding on companies and
citizens.
4)Governing through enabling, deﬁned as governance through
facilitating, coordination, collaboration and encouraging. This
mode of governance can take many diverse forms, spanning
from formal partnerships to informal community engagement.The distribution of authority between the levels of governance
varies from country to country, and the potential for municipalities
to engage in, for example, legally binding planning activities or to
govern by authority may be quite different. Scandinavian countries
have a tradition of a deep distribution of power to local
governments.
The purpose of the present paper is to explore how cities and
municipalities can combine multiple modes of governance to
support and facilitate a local level transition from a linear economy
towards a circular economy, in which physical ﬂows are looped
back into the production of new products and services. The analysis
in this paper is based on two in-depth case studies of Danish mu-
nicipalities working in collaboration with local stakeholders to
close the material loops of two targeted waste streams. The ﬁrst
case study explores the recycling of textile waste, while the second
case study explores a circular economy in the construction and
demolition ﬁeld. The case studies are discussed in detail, followed
by a discussion about how municipalities can support and facilitate
the transition to a circular economy using different modes of
governance.
2.3. Local governments in Denmark
A report from the Nordic Ministers Council ( Christiansen et al.,
2019 ) focussing on circular economies in municipalities in the
Nordic countries identi ﬁed a broad variety of projects and activities
targeting the circular economy, stretching from small-scale projects
with a few partners to large-scale inter-municipal projects.
Like most Scandinavian countries, the political system in
Denmark distributes relatively large autonomy to local govern-
ments (municipalities) compared to the political systems in many
other countries. Denmark is divided into 5 regions and 98 munic-
ipalities. The regions ’main obligation is to manage healthcare
(hospitals and psychiatry services), whereas the municipalities
have a broad spectrum of responsibilities. This also implies that the
central government and the municipalities are the most important
government levels for promoting circular economy activities. In
Denmark, the municipalities are the primary level of governmentinvolved in waste management, with the overall responsibility for
all household waste. The municipalities must adopt waste plans
that cover four years and point 10 years into the future. Addition-
ally, Danish municipalities usually hold joint ownership of waste
management companies, which operate the recycling stations in
Denmark as well as the 19 Danish combined heat and power waste
incineration plants. This ownership relation provides an often-used
opportunity for governing by provision.
3. Methods
This article presents the results from a multi-stakeholder, co-
innovation project called “Partnership for Circular Municipalities ”
that was undertaken in the Capital Region of Denmark. The purpose
of the partnership was to support, demonstrate and develop therole of local governments (municipalities) in promoting the tran-
sition to a circular economy through partnerships between mu-
nicipalities, waste companies and knowledge institutions.
The project was ﬁnanced by Regional Council Development
Funds. The consortium comprised ﬁve municipalities (Bornholm,
Copenhagen, Albertslund, Rudersdal and Hørsholm), three waste
companies (BOFA, Vestforbrænding and Norfors), and three
knowledge institutions (Roskilde University, the think tank CON-CITO and Gate21).
Four demonstration projects were carried out as part of the
project:T.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305 (2021) 127058
3