et al., 2017). 
In particular, Food Waste Hierarchy (FWH) frameworks suggest 
different available options for organizations to tackle food waste, 
identifying a set of priority actions (Redlingshöfer et al., 2020), which 
are ranked mostly from an environmental impact perspective, from the 
most sound environmental option to the least one (Cristóbal et al., 
2018). Nevertheless, the actions and strategies connected with the 
layers in the upper part of the FWH, i.e., food waste prevention, are 
underrepresented in the current literature (Redlingshöfer et al., 2020). 
The gap in the understanding of the potential benefits of such solutions, 
leads to a lack of guidance to choose the most effective technologies for 
FLW prevention. 
On the technological side, in the recent years the urging challenge of 
food waste has represented a fertile ground for technological innova -
tions. All in all, different technologies can support the valorization of food waste at different levels of the FWH (
Vandermeersch et al., 
2014a,b), thus tackling the issue while opening up new business op -
portunities. 
Notwithstanding the priority role assigned, the adoption of the in -
novative technological solutions for food waste prevention
, can bring 
relevant challenges for the companies in the food supply chain. The key competences and technical expertise related to such infrastructures and 
technologies (e.g., innovative food packaging or innovative process 
technologies - Mourad, 2016), lie outside the agri-food supply chain, 
therefore immediate and potential performance are uncertain and dif
-
ficult to be fully understood by agri-food players. These solutions might 
end up in becoming “weak” forms of prevention, if not properly sup -
ported by a shift in the business model (
Mourad, 2016). This uncertain 
scenario does not clarify what are the extra efforts and costs that these 
technologies might represent for some actors within the chain and 
whether or not they would be compensated by extra benefits for one or 
more players along the agri-food supply chain. 
Hence, these technologies are just partially explored in the literature 
and little is known about the implications connected to their adoption 
by the players in the food supply chain. The present paper, through a 
set of 34 semi-structured interviews explores i) the typologies of tech -
nological solutions proposed by different technology providers for FLW 
prevention; and ii) which factors stimulate or hinder their adoption 
under different forms and the application within the agri-food supply 
chain. 
The paper develops as follows, Section 2 reports a synthetic over -
view on the literature background. Section 3 present the research 
questions and methodology, while Section 4
, 5 and 6 are focused on the 
presentation of the results and their discussion and conclusions re -
spectively. 
2. Background 
2.1. The sustainability challenges of food loss and waste 
Food loss and waste (FLW) is a relevant issue from the social, en -
vironmental and economic standpoint. 
As for the economic dimension, reducing FLW represents a saving 
for all the actors in the supply chain (
Chaboud and Daviron, 2017). 
Notably, initiatives that tackle FLW at its roots are beneficial for food 
producers that aim to sell more, but also to consumers who could have 
access to available food which is more affordable (De Steur et al., 
2016). Whether and to what extent managing surplus food to prevent 
FLW can outweigh the cost connected to the extra operations needed to 
handle this surplus food, is still subject to a debate in the literature 
(Chaboud and Daviron, 2017). 
Regarding the environmental dimension, a significant amount of 
agricultural inputs such as fertilizers, energy, and water are used to 
produce, then process, transport, distribute, store, and make food 
available for human consumption. Consequently, FLW is also a waste of 
land, water, energy and inputs (Gustavsson et al., 2011). Yet, all the actions that aim not only at managing surplus food but preventing its generation, can decrease the pressure that is exerted on natural re
-
sources (
Timmermans et al., 2014; Chaboud and Daviron, 2017). 
In addition to the important implications for the environment, 
surplus food and food waste prevention can also have a considerable 
impact on the society. 
A reduction in the FLW generates indeed higher food security that 
extends the benefits to households (Timmermans et al., 2014;  
Chaboud and Daviron, 2017). When surplus food is redistributed thanks 
to food aid organizations or food banks to people who normally struggle 
to have access to nutritional food, food waste from a social point of 
view is avoided (Garrone et al., 2014) and thus there is a direct impact 
on the social dimension. Moreover, the increasing awareness around 
the so-called “food paradox”, i.e., having a large amount of food waste 
in a world which is still food insecure (FAO, 2018), represents a re -
levant social driver for the implementation of FLW reduction strategies. 
The food that is wasted every year could indeed feed the nearly one in 
nine people all over the world who suffers from hunger, especially in 
developing and under-developed countries (
Godfray et al., 2010). 
2.2. Circular economy and food waste management hierarchies 
Circular Economy represents a compelling reference framework for 
the management of food waste (Teigiserova et al., 2020). Put differently, 
food waste valorization options, like reduction, reuse and recycling 
support the aims of the circular economy paradigm (Geueke et al., 2018). 
Food waste hierarchies, as waste hierarchies in general, represent a 
powerful guidance for practitioners and policy makers to understand 
possible practices to be adopted. As Table 1 exhibits, different priorities 
of actions and different policies to follow for food waste management are embedded into different hierarchical frameworks that have been devel
-
oped after the Waste Framework Directive 2008/98/EC (
European 
Commission, 2008). In the Food Waste Hierarchy (FWH) framework 
introduced by Papargyropoulou et al. (2014) for example, the strategies 
of avoiding surplus food generation as well as the strategy of reusing 
surplus food for human consumption are high priority strategies because 
they allow to reduce the depletion of natural resources and to limit the 
negative social and ethical implications of FLW. Garrone et al. (2014) is 
aligned with the view that prevention of FLW through different redis -
tribution and reuse options still targets human consumption, thus mini -
mizing the waste from a social perspective. Garrone et al. (2016) iden-
tifies different reuse options (e.g., remanufacturing and repacking, sales 
with promotions and discounts, sales in secondary channels as ad-hoc 
distributor for surplus food) as well as redistribution, both internal to the 
employees of a company and external, through the collaboration with 
food aid organizations. Rood et al. (2017) classify the different redis -
tribution and reuse options, not implying reprocessing, as forms of human 
food recovery
. In a distinct layer in the ladder they instead consider 
converting into human food, in those cases in which food products are transformed into new edible products, so they are not consumed in their 
original forms. Interestingly, while most of the frameworks are aligned in 
terms of available options in the lower parts of the waste hierarchy 
(ranging from recycling of food products into not-edible alternatives, 
food recovery for the generation of energy and then incineration and 
disposal) some differences can be found moving up the waste hierarchy. 
When referring to prevention policies Garrone et al. (2016) and  
Vandermeersch et al. (2014a,b) refer to the prevention of food waste and loss, and not the reduction or avoidance of surplus food. This approach 
focuses on avoiding the post harvest losses and thus considering the 
possible generation of food waste from the moment in which food pro
-
ducts are ready to be harvested (
Chaboud and Daviron, 2017). The Food 
Recovery Hierarchy (United States Environmental Protection Agency - EPA, 2012) esplicitly considers the reduction of the volume of surplus 
food generated as the strategy having highest priority. As a whole, extant 
food waste hierarchies focus primarly on priorities of actions to manage 
surplus food, considering harvesting losses as unavoidable, hence F. Ciccullo, et al.   Resources, Conservation & Recycling 164 (2021) 105114
2