algo-Crespo,  F.X. Jervis and C.M. Moreira et al. / Procedia CIRP 90 (2020) 49–54 
use plastics  ( PlasticsEurope,  2018 , Xanthos  and Walker,  2017 ), such 
as expanded  polystyrene  (EPS) which represents  6.26% of all the 
plastic waste in the country.  
EPS is an excellent  material  for packaging  and construction,  be- 
cause of its light weight,  rigidity,  highly desirables  insulation  prop- 
erties and shock resistance.  On the other hand, polystyrene  is very 
stable and extremely  hard to degrade  in the environment  after dis- 
posal ( Ho et al., 2018 ). One study on life cycle analysis  concludes  
that to produce  1.716 g of EPS, 87.47 mg of CO 2 are released  in the 
atmosphere  ( Tan and Khoo, 2005 , Leejarkpai  et al., 2016 ). 
The city hall of Guayaquil,  aims to regulate  the manufacture,  
trade (of any type), distribution  and delivery  of single-use  plastics.  
Within  this ordinance,  the manufacturers  of single-use  EPS items 
must change  the formula  in their process,  to a new formula  or 
product  agreeing  with any of the following  options:  1) products  are 
100% biodegradable,  2) 70% of total product  mass comes from recy- 
cled materials  and 3) using other reusable  materials  in the lapse of 
30 months  ( Ecuador.  Autonomous  Decentralized  Government  Mu- 
nicipality  of Guayaquil,  2018 ). In concordance  with the local ordi- 
nance are international  regulations  that the country  needs to ac- 
complish.  For example,  in July 2019, the Associated  States of the 
Paciﬁc Alliance,  from which Ecuador  is a new member,  referred  to 
the importance  of developing  new policies  to promote  the integral  
management  of waste and reducing  the production  of single-use  
plastics  ( Ecuador.  Autonomous  Decentralized  Government  Munici-  
pality of Guayaquil,  2019 ). 
Importantly,  Guayaquil  is the city with highest  plastic manufac-  
turing, according  to the Ecuadorian  Plastic Associantion  (ASEPLAS),  
64% of the 600 companies  nationwide  are localted  in this impor- 
tant and this single industry  generates  more than 19,0 0 0 direct 
and 120,0 0 0 indirect  jobs ( Magazine,  20 08 ). Furthermore,  nation-  
wide EPS container  manufacturers  do not comply  with any of the 
three choices  the city hall ordinance  has set as acceptable.  This is 
the main reason why EPS item producer  ´s opinion  is that the local 
ordinance  could harm the industry  in its production  processes  and 
risk the stability  of many workers.  
Thus, the following  question  arises: what strategy  should plastic 
manufacturing  companies  follow to survive  in this new local eco- 
friendly  environment?  
One contributing  solution  is shifting  from a linear economy  to 
a circular  economy  in single-use  items production  by means of 
reusing  and recycling  expanded  polystyrene  products.  Manufactur-  
ers already  reuse their scrap as part of their production  process  
(between  30 to 40%), so if they add post-consume  resin as raw ma- 
terial, they could achieve  the 70% recycled  material  objective  set by 
the municipality.  
This study focuses  in giving feasible  options  to the single-use  
plastic manufacturers  to redesign  their products,  so they can in- 
crease the use of recycled  (post-consume)  material;  applying  the 
concept  of circular  economy  to strengthen  their competitiveness  
and supporting  resource  sustainability.  
For this purpose,  the linear typical economy  and circular  econ- 
omy proposal  set by the authors  are presented  in the methodology  
( Section  2 ). The process  description  to obtain the recycled  resin 
from post-consume  containers  effectuated  by the manufacturer  is 
then presented.  Production  of new recycled  containers  and labo- 
ratory test values are presented  in the results ( Section  3 ). Finally,  
conclusions  and discussion  are presented  in Sectons  4 and 5 . 
2. Methodology  
The prevailing  linear economic  system  in local plastic manufac-  
turers accumulates  waste, while depleting  natural  resources.  Limi- 
tations  of natural  resources  and a growing  world population  have 
set the idea of a circular  economy  in the focus of research,  industry  
and politics  in recent years ( Spierling  et al., 2018 ). Fig. 1. Linear economy  EPS cycle. 
2.1. Linear economy  EPS production  cycle 
Plastic is present  everywhere,  every day; either as a raw ma- 
terial or as ﬁnished  product.  As a result, plastic is a continuous  
growing  industry.  Indeed,  its sales has reﬂected  a steady growth  of 
about 9% in the period from 2014 to 2018 ( Mativenga  et al., 2017 ). 
This industry  has made rapid progress,  since plastic is an element  
used in different  sectors.  In addition  to being the main raw mate- 
rial, it is a product  on which many other processes  depend.  It is 
estimated  that between  70 to 80% of necessary  plastic is supplied  
by local industries  ( Magazine,  2008 ), only importing  highly spe- 
cialized  plastic products  or in large volumes.  Nevertheless,  most 
residues  end up in landﬁlls,  culminating  a linear economy  and af- 
fecting  the environment.  Fig. 1 shows the current  linear economy  
to manufacture  EPS products  in the country.  Next, each of the steps 
presented  in the scheme  of EPS lineal economy  cycle will be ex- 
plained  in detail. 
2.1.1. Raw material  
According  to ASEPLAS,  the import  of plastic resins reached  381 
thousand  tons in 2017 ( Magazine,  2008 ). Plastic companies  acquire  
almost all its raw material  from abroad,  because  there is no local 
petrochemical  industry  that can produce  in large volumes  to meet 
the demand  of national  industries.  Futrthermore,  plastic companies  
in Ecuador  make no-effort  s to obt ain raw materials  from recycling  
of EPS waste and don ´t attempt  to ﬁnd alternative  materials,  given 
that EPS is very ingrained  in the culture  of society.  
2.1.2. EPS product  manufacture  and Scrap reuse/reprocess  
In an attempt,  to reduce the use of “virgin resin” residues  from 
the manufacturing  process  are collected  (scrap)  for reuse. For this 
purpose,  the raw material  in the form of a mix of “virgin” and  
“scrap” resin  pellets,  enters the manufacture  process  to obtain ex- 
panded  polystyrene  products,  such as: dishes,  plates, drink con- 
tainers.  Also, residues  from this process  are collected  in the form 
of scrap for later treatment  and reuse. The latter tries to avoid 
residues  within the boundaries  of the company.