s  
Barriers  that have the highest  net causal-effect  (R-C) values, 
therefore,  have the greatest  long-term  impact  on the system,  so 
long-term  effort s should be made to address  these issues. Similarly,  
the barriers  with the highest  prominence  values have the poten- 
tial to affect and/or be affected  by other barriers.  Therefore,  man- 
agers and policymakers  should prioritize  addressing  or circumvent-  
ing these in the short-term,  presenting  a practical  approach  to 
the otherwise  complex  web of political,  technological,  and insti- 
tutional  structures  ( Papargyropoulou  et al., 2014 ). The interdepen-  
dencies  and interrelationships  highlight  the previously  noted im- 
portance  of integrated  decision  making  in CE activities  and design 
( Lechner  and Reimann,  2020 ). 
Table 10 summarizes  the overall results and provides  a com- 
parison  of key cause and high prominence  barriers.  The results 
reveal many similarities  in the responses  of the three evaluator  
groups.  For example,  weak legal enforcement  (B1) is identiﬁed  as 
a key cause barrier  by all three evaluator  groups.  This ﬁnding  is 
in line with that of Farooque  et al. (2019b)  which focused  on bar- 
riers to circular  food supply chains in China. All three evaluator  
groups  also identify  the lack of environmental  education  and ac- 
countability  (B9) as a cause barrier,  which conﬁrms  the ﬁnding  
of Zhang et al. (2019) on the barriers  to smart waste manage-  
ment in China. The strength  of legal enforcement  is a societal  ele- 
ment that will affect all evaluator  groups.  These results enable us 
to assess barriers  beyond  those that may be identiﬁed  with insti- 
tutional  perspectives  (e.g., as in Ranta et al., 2017). While there 
may be separate  legal requirements  that affect a given industry  
or evaluator  group more than another,  there is a consensus  that 
the weak enforcement  of the legal framework  in this area reduces  
the need for action;  this result is different  to the identiﬁcation  
of Yuan (2017) of an inadequate  regulatory  environment.  Simi- 
larly, the low levels of environmental  education  would inﬂuence  
individuals  acting within each of the evaluator  groups;  long-term  
changes  to a national  curriculum  would lead to positive  changes  
within each evaluator  group ( Zhang et al., 2019 ). Greater  education  
will enable ﬁrms to enhance  their awareness  (addressing  concerns  identiﬁed  by Liu and Bai (2014) ), collect better data ( Yuan 2017 ), 
and develop  improved  performance  monitoring  systems  (Su et al., 
2013). 
In the same way, there is a consensus  among  the study evalu- 
ators on the role of barrier  B8 (lack of economies  of scale). Food 
processors  consider  it as key cause barrier,  whereas  sales and dis- 
tribution  channels  and consumers  view it as the most prominent  
barrier.  The relatively  small scale that many food processors  oper- 
ate on will mean that their lack of economies  of scale will lead 
to and contribute  more to other barriers;  in contrast,  the scale of 
many sales and distributions  ﬁrms will mean that this is less likely 
to be a cause, however,  given its high prominence  score, it will be 
one the short term challenges  for the sales and distribution  chan- 
nels to address.  
Moreover,  both the food processors  and sales and distribution  
channels  identiﬁed  B2 (inadequate  infrastructure)  as the prominent  
barrier.  This is reasonable  as these ﬁrms would rely on the provi- 
sion of suﬃcient  infrastructure  to support  their effort s in sustain-  
able food loss and waste management.  The inﬂuence  of infrastruc-  
ture aligns with previous  discussions  on the need for more ﬁrms 
along the supply chain( Boons and Lüdeke-Freund,  2013 ) and higher 
numbers  of ﬁrms involved  ( Veleva et al., 2017 ). Lastly, B4 (lack of 
investment  in advanced  equipment/technologies)  is identiﬁed  with 
high prominence  by food processors  and consumers.  The barrier  
has similarities  to the ﬁnancing  options  in general  CE studies  in 
China (Su et al., 2014); however,  it is not considered  as a barrier  
by sales and distribution  channel  members.  The reason they do 
not perceive  it as a barrier  is likely due to the size of the ﬁrms; 
many food producers  will be smaller  ﬁrms and they, along with 
consumers,  will be less endowed  with ﬁnancial  resources  required  
to make or invest in suﬃcient  changes  to improve  food loss and 
waste management  processes.  The sales and distribution  ﬁrms tend 
to be larger and will tend to have suﬃcient  slack resources  that 
can be redeployed  to support  sustainable  food loss and waste man- 
agement  activities.  
Despite  these similarities,  there are some differences  as well. 
For example,  the cost barrier  (B7) was identiﬁed  as the key cause 
barrier  by sales and distribution  channels.  This identiﬁcation  may 
relate to the relatively  small margins  and level of intensity  in many 
retail and distribution  environments;  such tight margins  would 
preclude  investments  with indeﬁnite  payoffs.  This suggests  oppor- 
tunities  for the design and implementation  of improved  incen- 
tivization  schemes  (Su et al., 2013). Lack of expertise  (B5) was 
identiﬁed  by food processors  as the most prominent  barrier  in 
their case. The lack of capability  and expertise  in the staff will  be 
related  to the low levels of general  capabilities  in society  (partly 
driven by low levels of education  in this area) and the sudden  need 
for the ﬁrm to gain this expertise.  A general  need for expertise  
1123