ployment ( World Bank, 2020 ). Across the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2019)
almost one person out of three is employed in a micro ﬁrm with less
than 10 employees, and two out of three in an SME. In many
countries SMEs contribute more than 50% of GDP ( International
Labour Organization, 2020 ). At the start of 2018 SMEs accounted
for 99.9% of all private sector businesses, 59.2% of private sector
employment and 51.0% of private sector turnover in England(Department for Business, Energy &Industrial Strategy and Of ﬁce
for National Statistics (2018) . As such SMEs have a vital role to
play in the economy, employment, environmental protection and
resource ﬂows.
The most recent data providing a breakdown on the levels of
C&I waste based on businesses size was published in 2011
(Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and
Government Statistical Service, 2011 )esubsequent government
studies do not show this detail. Data shows that 64.3% of the total
C&I waste generated in England originated from SMEs with 12.3%
generated by businesses with less than 10 employees (see Table 2 ).
Historically there has been a focus on the environmental impact
of large business but due to economic, social and legislative drivers,
larger businesses, in general, have well established waste man-
agement systems. For many SMEs this is not the case.
In England Duty of Care legislation sets out the responsibility of
businesses towards managing the waste they generate. The legis-
lation aims to ensure that the waste generated does not cause harm
to the environment and human health. Under Duty of Care busi-
nesses must ensure the waste they produce is managed in a
responsible way and it is illegal for businesses to place waste they
generate in services for household waste. In other countries similar
legislation exists. For example in the USA and Australia it is com-
mon for conditions on the use of bins and storage of waste to be set
out in ordinances eseeCity and County of Denver, Colorado (2016)
Code of Ordinances Chapter 48 Waste Management , and the City of
Sydney (2013) Waste Policy Local Approvals Policy For Managing
Waste In Public Places . Despite the levels of waste generated frombusinesses there are surprisingly few journal papers on the man-
agement of C &I waste and compliance with Duty of Care regula-
tions or similar regulations in other jurisdictions.
2. Aim and contribution to knowledge
This paper presents the results of research conducted in Brigh-
ton and Hove City on the south coast of England focusing on the
management of waste in SMEs and compliance with Duty of Care
regulations. The aims were to (i) build on existing literature to
understand how SMEs are currently managing their waste (ii) to
understand levels of compliance with the Duty of Care regulations
(iii) through waste composition analysis estimate levels of C &I
waste illegally entering the household waste stream (iv) consider
the implications of current practice and make recommendations.
The research contributes to the limited knowledge of how
businesses are currently managing their waste and levels of
compliance with Duty of Care regulations. In addition to collating
data from 100 SMEs through semi-structured interviews, it is the
ﬁrst study that the author is aware of which attempts to estimate
levels of business waste abuse of household services through un-
dertaking waste composition analysis. With global policy makers
increasingly focusing on the Circular Economy the research is the
ﬁrst study to estimate levels of resource leakage of recyclable and
biowaste from SMEs entering the residual household stream thatshould be managed more appropriately. The study presents in-
dicators to identify C &I waste entering the household waste stream
which could assist researchers undertaking similar research and
highlights a range of implications associated with non-compliance
with Duty of Care. Given the levels of waste generated, improvedresource recovery in SMEs could have a signi ﬁcant environmental,
economic and social bene ﬁts.
The legal framework and system for managing C &I waste in
England is presented followed by a review of literature on
compliance with Duty of Care. The methods adopted are presented
followed by the results, discussion and conclusion.Table 1
Deﬁnition, arisings and management of Commercial and Industrial Waste in England . (Adapted from Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs &Government
Statistical Service, 2019a ;Great Britain, 1990 ).
Waste
streamDeﬁnition Tonnes generated 2017
(million tonnes)
Commercial Waste from: premises (including agriculture) used wholly or mainly for the purposes of a trade or business or the purposes of
sport, recreation or entertainment excluding household waste or industrial waste.27.1
Industrial Waste from:
- any factory;
- any premises used for the purposes of, or in connection with, the provision to the public of transport services by land, water
or air;
- any premises used for the purposes of, or in connection with, the supply to the public of gas, water or electricity or the
provision of sewerage services;
- any premises used for the purposes of, or in connection with, the provision to the public of postal or telecommunications
services; or any mine or quarry. >10.8
Table 2
Deﬁnition and waste generation by businesses in England . (Adapted from Department for Business, Energy &Industrial Strategy and Of ﬁce for National Statistics, 2018 ;
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2011 ;ECORYS, 2012 andEuropean Commission, 2005 ).
Category Number of
employeesTurnover % of enterprises in
EU% of enterprises in
EnglandWeight of waste (million
tonnes)% of Total C &I
waste
Micro 1 to 9 /C20V2 million 92.2 95.7 5.9 12.3
Small 10 to 49 /C20V10 million or balance sheet total /C20V10
million6.5 3.6 10.7 22.4
Medium 50 to 249 /C20V50 million or balance sheet total
/C20V43million1.1 0.6 14.2 29.6
Large Over 250 0.2 0.2 17.1 35.7R. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278 (2021) 123770 2