Based  on  the  above  ﬁndings  we  introduce  the  term
‘forgotten  plastics’  for  non-household  end-use  plastic.
Generally,  industrial  actors  and  some  policy  makers  are
well  aware  that  these  waste  streams  exist,  yet  these
potentially  highly  recyclable  plastics  typically  disappear
in  the  overall  waste  statistics  and  consequently,  policies,
and  scientiﬁc  research  does  not  address  it  separately,  also
caused  by  the  lack  of  data.  Literature  indicates  that  in
terms  of  quantity  and  quality  they  could  signiﬁcantly
contribute  to  the  circular  economy  for  plastics.
To  give  non-household  end-use  plastic  waste  a  chance  to
become  part  of  a  circular  economy,  the  lack  of  data  and
the  related  of  lack  of  attention  that  has  been  lasting  for  a
few  decades  [23]  has  to  end.  We  therefore  propose  astrategy  to  mitigate  the  current  status  quo  of  recycling
non-household  end-use  plastic  waste,  which  is  depicted
in  Figure  2.
First,  a  clear  terminology  has  to  be  introduced  that  allows
setting  the  right  focus  on  data  collection,  research,  and
policymaking.  We  propose  to  systematically  subdivide
the  ISO  deﬁnition  of  post-consumer  waste  into  household
and  non-household  material  and  thereby  acknowledging
the  difference  in  origin,  composition,  and  recycling
potential.
Secondly,  to  mitigate  arguments  on  the  economic  feasi-
bility  of  recycling  these  non-household  fraction,  a  struc-
tural  collection  of  data  on  quantities  and  qualities  has  to  be
done  based  on  the  terminology  as  described  above.
Thereby  it  is  crucial  to  analyze  different  sectorsNon-household  end-use  plastics:  forgotten  plastics  Kleinhans  et  al.  5
Figure  2
Und erstand ing the status qu  o by structural 
coll ecti on of data of waste generati  on and 
compositi  ons per NACE sectorsData on quality   and quantitie  sIntrodu cti on of a clear terminology for 
non-h ousehold end-u  se waste for use in data 
gathering, resea  rch & poli  cy makingCle ar terminology
Creati ng local bu  siness  cases, e.g.,   new recycli  ng 
faciliti es and  creati ng bus ine ss links  to create a 
local network for a circular economyCirc ular business   casesFinding the optimal trade-off   betwee n suff icient 
material coll  ecti on to make a coll  ecti on system 
economicall  y and  prov iding the best qu  alit y for 
recycli ng poss  ible, e.g.,   by source separationTailore  d waste manag  ement
Behavior change
Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering
Flowchart  suggestion  to  bring  focus  on  non-household  end-use
plastics  in  the  future.  Blue  arrows  indicate  co-dependencies.
www.sciencedirect.com  Current  Opinion  in  Chemical  Engineering  2021,  1:100680