coglu et al.
1 3
Introduction
As one of the fastest growing sectors, electrical and elec-
tronic equipment production leads to increase in waste electric electronic equipment (WEEE), or say, e-waste (Babu et al. 2007; Neto et al. 2016). There is a direct relationship between the consumption rates of electronic goods and the amount of generated electronic waste (e-waste). Due to shrinking product life cycles, e-waste is a dynamic category of waste, as the new models of the products are introduced to the market, the consumers tend to purchase the latest versions, and therefore, adaptive recycling methods are needed (Olofsson and Mali 2017; Babar et al. 2019). This rapid growth in e-waste leads to the circular economy and sustainability-related concerns in terms of impacts on environment, society and economy.
More research is needed focusing on e-waste recycling 
activities (Bridgens et al. 2019). Advantages of e-waste recycling were categorized under economic, environmen-tal and public health and safety benefits (Kumar et al. 2017). Four economic benefits of e-waste recycling are, firstly, recovery of e-waste with an estimated value of £ 48 billion, and based on value the recovered metals include copper, gold, silver, palladium, aluminium and iron. Sec-ondly, concentration of metals in the e-waste stream is considerably higher than in the mining operations. Thirdly, e-waste provides the opportunity for reusing rare natural elements including gallium and indium. Finally, e-waste industry creates jobs and economic opportunities. In addition, three main environmental benefits of e-waste recycling are: Firstly, it reduces risks of disposal keeping hazardous waste out of landfills. Secondly, it decreases demand for new metal production and consequently reduces greenhouse emissions caused by metal production and finally energy saving by e-waste recycling. Adding to that, main public health and safety benefits of e-waste recycling are further stated as, the reduction in harmful effects of e-waste on public health and safety, including skin problems, damage to organs and bone structure, prob-lems in nervous system, etc.
Among advantages or benefits of e-waste recycling, 
e-waste management is a complex activity. Managing e-waste contains many hazardous materials, and the pro-cess of e-waste recycling involves significant risks to the environment, human safety and business (Streicher-Porte et al. 2007 ) and also for circular economy. Moreover, recy -
cling of e-waste, which is one of the effective strategies of circular economy, directly benefits to circular economy and it is crucial to have circular economy approach to gain more value based on sustainability (Reike et al. 2018). 
Therefore, a systematic approach is essential to evalu-ate risks of e-waste (Asante et al. 2019). In this sense, treatment of the e-waste is the most important subject in terms of minimizing negative impacts. Structured risk assessment for e-waste recycling is essential to under -
stand the impacts on society and environment (Frazzoli et al. 2010). With this view, sustainability risk assessment 
(SRA) of e-waste recycling would be beneficial to deal with environmental, social and economic risks in an indus -
trial context.
Different risks of e-waste recycling require crucial deci-
sions due to the presence of uncertainty in the process. Decision-making plays an important role during the SRA, as assessing risks further seen as the main domain of such process (Chemweno et al. 2015). However, decision-making attitudes of human are usually neglected, and a theoretical integration is missing.
From this point of view, research question for this study is 
stated as: “How shall we incorporate decision making under risk and irrationality within SRA for e-waste recycling?”
This research aims to develop a decision-making method 
in uncertain and risky conditions in e-waste recycling sys-tem. To achieve this aim, firstly prospect theory, which is a behavioural theory that considers decision-making under uncertainty and risk, is proposed to examine sustainability risks of e-waste recycling. Secondly, a prospect theory-based multicriteria decision method, TODIM (acronym in Portu-guese for interactive and multicriteria decision-making, i.e. Tomada de Decisão Interativa Multicritério), is used to evaluate listed risks. In order to show the applicability of this work, a computer disassembly problem is used as a case study, where computer disassembly tasks are evalu-ated according to relevant sustainability risks. Therefore, the novel point in this study is to evaluate the risks to the sus-tainability, within a system approach by integrating SRA and prospect theory to consider irrationality and risk attitudes of decision makers within the risky and uncertain nature of e-waste recycling system.
This study is structured as follows: in “Sustainability risk 
assessment (SRA) in e-waste recycling” section, the SRA in e-waste recycling is presented. In “Prospect theory” section, the details of prospect theory are given. In “Integration of SRA with prospect theory based TODIM” section, the inte-gration of SRA and prospect theory is explained. “ TODIM 
method” section gives the details of methodology, and “Case study” section presents the case study. “Results” section cov -
ers the discussion and conclusions.
Sustainability risk assessment (SRA) 
in e‑waste recycling
Sustainability is used for describing the conditions of the 
society, environment and economy (Sikdar 2020). From the risk assessment point of view, sustainability risks have