y selection and criteria
The main criteria for shortlisting the search results under each of the
six themes for further analysis was technology which included hard-
ware, software, and services. Only studies and other information pub-
lished in 2008 and onwards were included to obtain contemporary
research and state-of-the-art technologies applied in practice. Each type
of information source was screened in a di ﬀerent manner to ﬁlter out
false positive results from the automated search engines as follows:
1 Scienti ﬁc studies: The title and the abstract were screened
2 Business reports: The executive summaries and introductions were
screened
3 Company websites: Homepages were screened
4 News articles: The title and the ﬁrst three paragraphs of the article
were screened
Table 3 lists the criteria developed to determine topic relevance
before further detailed selection.
The screening determined which studies, reports, or news articles
were directly relevant to the scope of this research and would gothrough a full text review. As shown in Table 4, criteria were then
developed to ensure the information was relevant for answering theresearch question.
The shortlist resulted in 52 research papers, business reports, web-
sites, and news articles that went through a full text review.
The subsequent sections of this research describe the ﬁndings of the
thematic analysis of six pre-de ﬁned themes of ZWM and their tech-
nologies. Section 4discusses how the technologies in the themes can be
integrated to achieve ZWM and examines the limitations the ZWM
technologies may face during implementation in dense urban settings.
Section 5proposes future areas of research in ZWM that are needed to
overcome the limitations of the technologies examined in this study.
3. State-of-the-art technologies in zero waste manufacturing
Each theme of ZWM addresses a group of technologies needed for
waste generators, waste collectors, and waste to resource converters to
move towards ZWM. Through the thematic review, technologies areidentiﬁed that the ZWM stakeholders could adopt to overcome their
unique waste management challenges. An excel spreadsheet that clas-siﬁes the ZWM technologies and studies reviewed in this research is
provided in the supporting information.
3.1. Design for zero waste
Design for zero waste focuses on designing products that use less
materials and/or are easier to disassemble. This reduces the amount of
waste generated, makes it easier to collect used parts, and makes it
more feasible to recover parts or materials from the product at its end of
life. In the manufacturing industry, design for disassembly (DfD) and
additive manufacturing (AM) are able to achieve this goal. DfD is a
design strategy that considers the future need to disassemble a product
for repair, refurbishment, and recycling. Through DfD, valuable parts
and materials that still have value can be easily recovered and used in
the same or di ﬀerent products. AM technology constructs products by
directly joining materials layer by layer following a digital designtemplate. AM products can be developed to more precise design spe-
ciﬁcations and shapes from start to ﬁnish, which helps eliminate waste
generated along the manufacturing process, compared to conventionalmanufacturing.
3.1.1. Design for disassembly
Ameliorating product design during the development phase can
increase the recovery rate of products and their materials. DfD guide-
lines state that maximizing a product ’s ability to be disassembled can be
achieved during the design stage by looking at how to reduce thenumber of product parts, lower product disassembly costs, shorten
disassembly time, and solve all the existing problems in disassembly
(Soh et al., 2014 ). For DfD products to be successful and well received
by customers, it is recommended that they meet 14 di ﬀerent char-
acteristics provided by Wang et al. (2014) . To support decision-making
in DfD, Low
 et al. (2014) proposed a tool based on modular product
architecture.
Products with modular architectures are a notable example of DfD
because they can be disassembled into a number of subassemblies,parts, and components. Each subassembly can be considered a module
that can be independently created and then used again in other productTable 3
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for title and abstract screening.
Attribute Inclusion Exclusion
Field of study Field of study must be related to waste management and recycling,
manufacturing, and environmental sustainability.Field of study is not related to waste management and recycling,
manufacturing, and environmental sustainability (e.g. policy, ﬁnance, urban
management and planning).
Context within ﬁeld Title/abstract contains cues on technology, systems, and processes to
improve waste and resource management, reduction, and recycling in
manufacturing industry practices.Title/abstract contains cues of related topics (e.g. advanced manufacturingtechnologies, material recovery technologies, computational methods), butdo not directly discuss applications to improving environmentalsustainability in manufacturing practices.
Subject of discussion Title/abstract has to include discussion or description of the technology,
systems, or process applied in improving waste and resource management,reduction and recycling in manufacturing processes. The technology,system, or process should elaborate on the functions and should beimplementable or has been implemented.Title/abstract discusses principles and fundamental zero waste concepts;
history of zero waste; zero waste cases analysis with no relation to
technology, systems, or processes that support the objectives of ZWM.
Table 4
Subject matter relevance criteria for full text review.
Type of paper Content pro ﬁle of paper Paper must contain
Conceptual Conceptual description of technology. Yet to present evidence of
implementation.Concept of the technology, demonstrable by the logic and design and applicable to
ZWM themes.
Review and trends Description of industry trends and issues about a type of technology
applicable to ZWM.Details about the development status, industry standards, challenges and gaps, of
technology applicable to ZWM.
Empirical Description of how the technology works, what it can achieve, with
evidence of successful testing or implementation.Details about the functions, processes, and outputs of the technology and the
relationships between the steps, and what issues the technology solves.P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151 (2019) 104438
5