Services 50 (2021) 101298
9the key levers to improve the quality of recycled materials. In Article 
22(1): it stated “member states shall ensure that bio-waste is either 
separated and recycled at source, or is collected separately ” (Maarten 
et al., 2020 ). Separate collection is obligatory as of 2015 for paper, 
metal, plastic and glass, by 31 December 2023 for bio-waste and by 1 
January 2025 for textile and hazardous household waste. 
The success of regulation requires four elements: legal enforcement, 
economic incentives (fines), customized facilities and engaging 
communication. In the waste separate collection case, the legal 
enforcement includes, e.g. 1) visual inspection of recycling bags: if the 
waste worker sees incorrect materials, he can attach a sticker that 
highlights the non-compliance; 2) weight-based check: food waste is 
usually wet and heave. If the waste worker notices that the bag is light, it 
probably means that other waste has been wrongly put to the recycling 
bag. In both cases, the workers can leave the bag at the pick-up point. 
Local authorities could issue fines and other penalties to potential 
offenders. 
There is not a single waste collection system that can fit for all waste 
streams. Customized waste collection system may be optimal 
depending on, e.g. density of inhabitants, kind of housing, climate, 
collection culture. Civic Amenity Sites (CAS) offer households places 
where they can drop off almost all sorted waste streams. The two other 
common systems are door-to-door collection and street containers. In 
addition, communication is critical to inform restaurants and house -
holds about the regulation to avoid the potential oversight and has been 
proved efficient in the Swedish case of wood-waste management (Krook 
et al., 2008 ). 
4.2.2. Self-regulation 
Industry self-regulation (ISR) is the process whereby typically an 
industry-level organization, such as an industry association, monitors 
their own adherence to legal and safety standards and manages the 
partnerships, rather than external regulator monitors and enforces those 
actions (H˘eritier and Eckert (2008b) ). Industry self-regulation is an 
institutional complement to existing government regulatory processes. 
Self-regulation can also be a preventative strategy (H˘eritier and Eckert, 
2008a ): in response to the externalities created by business, e.g. in the LE 
paradigm, waste management could incur many environment exter -
nalities. By shaping an action collectively, firms can take the lead and 
coordinate themselves to transition to the BCE business, while avoiding 
the external mandatory policy regulations. 
Urban community garden is a good example of self-regulation. Many 
urban community gardens are often self-managing and self-regulating. 
They are typically managed by gardeners ’ associations (Yap, 2019 ). 
The association is responsible for organizing events in the garden, 
reallocating disused plots, managing communications, liaising with the 
government and authorities and setting up the rules of gardening. 
Outside of the formal management structure, the garden is developed 
and maintained according to agreements made by the community of 
gardeners. For example, decisions on how to cultivate shared and 
communal areas are made through community discussion. This form of 
decision-making depends upon the strong and trustable relationships 
between the gardeners. Gardeners are also self-managed through 
collaborating whereby tools, seeds, and knowledge are shared and 
exchanged. 
The self-regulation is expected to strengthen the sense of belonging 
and commitment level, develop more elaborate systems of self- 
regulation, building new forms of participation and responsibility. 
Self-regulation is also a strategy to impact potential government regu-
latory systems when new policy targets are emerging. Self-regulation 
usually proactively surpasses the expected compliance level, which 
might be utilized to complement stringent government regulations. 
4.2.3. Social supporting system 
Citizen awareness, engagement and behavior change are crucial for 
the success of BCE transition. This means that people participate in new forms of consumption (e.g. purchasing more locally produced food and 
enjoying more recreational activities in local green areas), recycling and 
disposal (reducing and sorting food waste) and production (utilizing 
biofertilizer and biopesticide from biorefineries). Even if the BCE en-
ables people to enjoy new possibilities compared to the LE system, 
shifting people behaviors still requires time, effort and commitment. 
This will require addressing not only the extrinsic attributes (e.g. 
infrastructure and incentives), but also intrinsic attributes (e.g. values 
and personal norms) of people behaviors (Parajuly et al., 2020 ). 
There are two commonly used social instruments for the behavioral 
changes in BCE: 1) education; 2) social norm shifting. Here, the edu-
cation is conceptualized in a broad sense to include all educational 
programs, information campaigns, or any other organized effort at 
deepening peoples ’ understanding of the effects of their behaviors on the 
natural resource and environment. In the early 70 s, it was believed that 
environmental knowledge and awareness were the key factors making 
people shift to pro-environmental behaviors; the latter was known as 
KAB (Knowledge-Attitude-Behavior) theory (Laroche et al., 1996 ). In 
1991, Ajzen presented the theory of planned behavior where he outlined 
three important drivers for pro-environmental behaviors (Ajzen, 1991 ). 
The first factor is attitude. A certain attitude towards a behavior is 
driven by beliefs about the outcomes of the person ’s behavior and the 
evaluation of those outcomes. The second factor is the social norm; i.e. a 
person ’s perception what other people think he should or should not do. 
The third factor is perceived behavioral control, i.e. people ’s perceptions 
of their ability to perform a given behavior. 
For example, the possibility that a person will sort food waste de-
pends on his attitude about sorting (e.g. ‘It is a waste of time ’ or ‘Food 
sorting is good for the environment ’) and the social norm (‘Will other 
people sort? ’). Finally, the person ’s ability (e.g. knowledge about sorting 
garbage, available time) will also affect his (her) participation in 
household-garbage sorting. 
The attitude will be affected by two factors. First, it depends on the 
beliefs about the outcomes of the sorting behaviors (e.g. ‘My sorting will 
not make any difference anyways ’ or ‘If everyone sorts food waste in a 
proper way, we will save our environment ’) and the evaluation of these 
outcomes (‘Is it important or unimportant? ’). Education and information 
campaign can enhance the awareness of the people on BCE and envi-
ronmental issues. Education can also deliver knowledge of environ -
mental laws and principles of functioning of the natural system to people 
and help them develop practical skills and the ability to make assess -
ment of the state of the environment. Through education, people are 
more aware of their own behaviors ’ impact on the environment and 
could adopt a more responsible attitude towards the BCE and environ -
ment. Hundreds of higher education institutions currently provide CE 
education as part of their programs in the fields of sustainability, engi-
neering, business studies and design (Tim, 2018 ). However, there is still 
a need to deliver the knowledge of CE to the children in primary and 
secondary schools and adults in society, through e.g. information 
campaign, informal education or experience sharing. 
In addition to attitudes affected by information and education, the 
social norm sets up rules which are followed by members of a group, and 
guides human behavior without the force of laws (Keizer and Schultz, 
2018 ). Social norms can affect individuals for a couple of reasons: people 
may wish to be accepted, avoid social disapproval, and obtain social 
reputation. People may also assume that others ’ behaviors are most 
effective when they do not have any prior knowledge themselves. A vast 
body of evidence demonstrates that social norms impact people ’s pro- 
environmental behaviors (Estrada et al., 2017 ). Many factors have 
been found to influence the extent to which social norm impacts pro- 
environmental behavior. These factors could be ranged from individ -
ual characteristics (e.g. intrinsic motivation, socio-demographic char-
acteristics, education level), the types of the social norms (e.g. 
descriptive vs. injunctive), the reference group (e.g. size, geographical/ 
social/temporal proximity) (Farrow et al., 2017 ). The social norm is 
contextual, which means it can vary across countries and be contingent R.-G. Cong and M. Thomsen