2018; Rateau and Tovar, 2019 ). In such a challenging
situation, could a socio-integrated recycling system with inte-
grated WPs be a robust strategy to boost a CE?
Transparency regarding the deﬁnition (and understanding) of
the CE concept and socio-integrated recycling system is needed
to answer the research question. According to Kirchherr et al.
(2017) ,‘‘The circularity approach seeks for an economic system that
replaces the ‘end-of-life’ concept by reducing, alternatively reusing,
recycling and recovering materials in production, distribution and
consumption processes within the aim to accomplish sustainable
development ”.Rutkowski and Rutkowski (2015) considered a
socio-integrated recycling system, i.e., ‘‘ the procedure of combining
informal sectors in urban services by giving WPs socio-economic
opportunities whereby the operational costs and environmental
impacts of landﬁlling can be minimised ”. Beneﬁts exist in favor of a
socio-integrated recycling system, but economic prosperity is still
the primary aim of the CE and might imply tradeoffs in terms of
economic growth ( Kirchherr et al., 2017 ).Kirchherr et al. (2017)
have correlated CE as an approach toward sustainability to bring
the perspective that is considered in this study, and which stands
for creating environmental quality, economic prosperity and social
equity, to the beneﬁt of current and future generations
simultaneously ”.
The integration of WPs in circularity initiatives is an issue to be
analyzed on a local scale. The situation of WPs can differ among
countries or cities because of, for example, legal issues, social
behavior, and culture. Belo Horizonte is a learning platform to
answer the research question mentioned above. Belo Horizonte is
Brazil’s fourth economic axis and a reliable reference for the orga-
nizational structure of WPs into cooperatives worldwide ( Alfaia
et al., 2017; Campos, 2014; IBGE, 2018; Tirado-Soto and
Zamberlan, 2013; UN-HABITAT, 2014 ). Through the study case, this
paper aims to analyze the socio-integration development of indi-
vidual groups that directly execute or inﬂuence an action in HSW
management and to discuss the barriers that WP communities face
towards the circular economy’s purposes.
The work applies the combination of participant observation
(Kawulich, 2005 ), material ﬂow analysis (MFA), and structural
agent analysis (SAA) developed by Binder ( Binder, 2007a, b ). The
methodological approach brings the focus on the role of agents sel-
dom studied in HSW management and is fundamental for opera-
tionalizing CE ( Bugge et al., 2019; Marshall and Farahbakhsh,
2013 ).
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the back-
ground information of Belo Horizonte’s case study. Section 3 outli-
nes the methodological framework and the respective research
steps carried out in this study. Section 4 presents the results of
the case study and the discussion. Sections 5 and 6 summarize
the conclusions.
2. A literature review about the situation of Belo Horizonte
Belo Horizonte, the capital of Minas Gerais’ state, is located in
southeast Brazil with a population of about 2.5 million (2014)
and an average growth rate of 0.6% per year since 2001 ( IBGE,
2018 ). The mainstays of its economy range over all three economic
sectors, with iron and steel mining industries, packaging, food,
biotechnology, business, and tourism jewelry as the main
branches.
Belo Horizonte is characterized by high social inequalities, with
a Gini coefﬁcient of 0.60 ( IBGE, 2018 ). This socio-economic situa-
tion is reﬂected by the high relevance of informal collecting and
sorting of HSW ( Varella, 2011 ). Belo Horizonte launched its Munic-
ipal Solid Waste Plan in 2017, after three years of the target having
been deﬁned by the Brazilian National Policy on Solid Waste(NPSW) ( HORIZONTE, 2017 ). NPSW is a political action for munic-
ipalities to pay attention to the mismanagement of HSW and the
integration of WP cooperatives ( Brazil 2010 ).
The plan is based on the status quo of Belo Horizonte’s HSW
management in 2014 ( HORIZONTE, 2017 ). Belo Horizonte presents
an advantage regarding the integration of WP cooperatives in com-
parison to other Brazilian cities. Belo Horizonte had the ﬁrst polit-
ical initiative to recognize waste pickers as agents of HSW
management in the 1990s ( Campos 2014; Jacobi and Teixeira
1997 ). The political initiative demonstrated the working value of
WPs, who were often confused as being part of the marginalized
groups of that time, and caused a social and political movement
nationally and internationally ( Campos 2014 ).Campos (2014)
described how Belo Horizonte’s political initiative opened opportu-
nities in line with Eco 92 and helped to establish social and govern-mental programs such as ‘‘Garbage and Citizenship” and the
‘‘National Forum Garbage and Citizenship”. Both programs aimed
to promote campaigns against child labor in dumpsites and partic-
ipative dialogue between governments and WPs funded by the
United Nations Children’s Funds and the Brazilian government in
1997 and 2000, respectively ( Campos 2014 ).
No technological treatment takes place in Belo Horizonte, as
shown in Fig. 1 . The conventional system relies on landﬁlling after
HSW is reloaded into larger vehicles at the transfer station ( SLU,
2014 ). Consequently, the long-term collection of mixed waste
motivated social interventions in HSW management activities
accompanied by constant popular movements ( Rutkowski, 2008;
Varella, 2011 ). The recycling network system started with CataUni-
dos in 2004. The recycling network systems promote joint action
for marketing and technical support to reduce the inﬂuences of
the informal sector ( Tirado-Soto and Zamberlan, 2013; Varella,
2011 ). As shown in Fig. 1 , the formal and the informal waste sec-
tors still run in parallel in Belo Horizonte. The informal sector helps
small and medium-sized middlemen businesses by creating the
opportunity to generate fast income by selling recyclable waste
at the lowest market prices ( Varella, 2011 ).
The difference between the formal (registered) WP cooperatives
and the informal sector is the services that formal WP cooperatives
provide for the city hall of Belo Horizonte. They perform door-to-
door collection followed by sorting of recyclables at working sheds
(Varella, 2011 ). Thus, for formal WPs, not only the economic aspect
of waste collecting and sorting is of relevance, but also their posi-
tion in the society as service providers for the city ( Rutkowski,
2008; Rutkowski and Rutkowski, 2015; Varella, 2011 ).
It is due to a signiﬁcant gap regarding the efﬁciency of the
socio-integrated recycling system that many decision-makers con-
sider the Belo Horizonte HSW management to be stagnating
(HORIZONTE, 2017 ). New perspectives from industries bring hope
for WP cooperatives to create best practices for the socio-
integrated system in the context of a circular economy ( Ometto
et al., 2018 ). Although the socio-integrated system is part of the
national policy ( BRAZIL, 2010b ), industries and Belo Horizonte’s
city council remain locked in a stalemate when it comes to invest-
ing in HSW management.
3. Research method and data
3.1. Overview
This study carried out three main stages that enable an in-depth
analysis of the dynamics of a real-life setting of the case study cho-
sen, as displayed in Fig. 2 .
The ﬁrst stage aimed to disclose the characteristics of the
system under review in-depth and to gather primary data. This
step followed the qualitative method approach of participatoryM. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121 (2021) 215–225
216