f a unique regional position in a CE. Pires and Martinho
(2019) argued that an understanding of regional CE knowledge is
needed to foster environmental outcomes and the total resource
management chain. Understanding MSWM in a CE at the regional
level is necessary to improve practices. As previously mentioned,
MSWM in a CE remains limited, and qualitative and quantitative
approaches and analyses are lacking ( Korhonen et al., 2018a ;Pires
and Martinho, 2019 ;Zeller et al., 2019 ). There are challenges and
opportunities for the development of MSWM in a CE since MSWM
is increasingly complex and a CE has problems in practice, while a
systematic literature examination indicates that the contributions
of MSWM in a CE remain unrevised and need to be clari ﬁed. Sys-
tematic qualitative and quantitative approaches provide an over-
view of the state of the art of MSWM in a CE for future study
directions and improvements in practice. The objectives of this
study are as follows:
/C15To describe MSWM in a CE and map the ﬁeld with proposed
indicators from valid data sources
/C15To explore the knowledge gaps in geographical regions based on
a proposed hybrid approach
Quantitative and qualitative approaches are proposed to
enhance the outcomes of the systematic review. A hybrid method,
including bibliometric analysis, the fuzzy Delphi method, and the
entropy weight method, is proposed. Bibliometric analysis is used
to visualize an overview of the bibliometric status and to reveal the
indicators of MSWM in a CE from the data of all publications in the
Scopus database, and the results are presented as visual informa-
tion ( Shukla et al., 2019 ). The fuzzy Delphi method aims to screen
out unnecessary indicators based on expert judgments due to the
complexity of a CE and the diversity of problems ( Tseng, 2009 ;
Tseng and Bui, 2017 ). The entropy weight method is applied to
transform the indicator frequency data into comparable weights to
determine the performance of regions on the indicators and to
identify the critical indicators for improvement in this study ( Wang
et al., 2015 ;Tseng, 2017 ).
This study contributes to (1) identifying important knowledge
to assist further studies and the implementation of practices, (2)
delivering guidelines regarding the directions of future studies by
reviewing the bibliometric status of MSWM in a CE and identifying
the critical indicators that need further examination, and (3)
addressing the challenges and gaps among geographical regions to
provide local viewpoints of MSWM in a CE.
The second section discusses related literature on a CE and
MSWM. The third section more clearly presents the data collection
process, methodologies, and proposed analytical steps. The results
are revealed in the fourth section. The ﬁfth section identi ﬁes future
challenges and discusses regional comparisons of MSWM in a CE.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in the last section.
2. Literature review2.1. Municipal solid waste management
MSWM is de ﬁned as complex procedures comprising waste
collection routes, transfer station locations, treatment and energy
recovery strategies, and waste treatment techniques are the core
means to achieve objectives, including human health and envi-
ronmental protection, economic development, and ful ﬁllment of
social and regulatory requirements ( Dewi et al., 2010 ).Sharholy
et al. (2008) claimed that ef ﬁcient MSWM requires support from
both authorities and citizens, where the latter are individuals with
evolving community awareness and societal interest. Soltani et al.
(2015) presented that MSWM is a complex procedure involvingmultiple decisive factors, such as environmental effects, related
economic outlays and bene ﬁ
ts, regional features, and political and
social issues. Therefore, sustainable MSWM is necessary for all
stages of the system, from design, scheduling and neutralization to
the preservation of environmental quality for future development
goals ( Pires et al., 2011 ). It is necessary to identify planning and
monitoring methods for SWM to reduce the generated amount of
waste, to recycle some waste with high economic value, and to
deﬁne indicators that support that a suitable direction is important
(Arıkan et al., 2017 ).
For solid waste intervention in a CE, Lee (2019) developed a
recycling investment sustainability framework that involves un-
certain petitions and nonlinear recycling expenses to balance
existing manufacturing restrictions, production bene ﬁts, and
recycling investments for a sustainable CE. Tisserant et al. (2017)
presented waste treatment and waste footprint scales to design
and assess policy instruments for a CE. Murphy and Pincetl (2013)
showed that material ﬂows are rounded up in a CE, with mate-
rials being used repeatedly to optimize consumption with no
wasted materials; the products are reused, repaired or redis-
tributed within the system at the end of life. If they cannot bereused or repaired, products can be recycled or recovered from
waste and used as inputs, replacing the need to exploit natural
resources ( Song et al., 2015 ).Ghisellini et al. (2016) andRicha et al.
(2017) suggested that a CE aims to prevent and eliminate waste by
cycling materials or used products within a closed-loop scheme to
obtain energy and resource effectiveness and pro ﬁtability. Ness and
Xing (2017) proposed that a CE aims to have no remaining in ﬂuence
on the ecosystem by recovering resource procurement damage
while minimizing the waste produced through manufacturing and
product life cycles. Waste reduction through recycling is stressed
under the principal points of reducing raw material consumption,
designing products in an eco-design manner, lengthening product
lifetimes through maintenance and repair, and recycling and using
products and raw materials recovered from waste ﬂows. However,
theoretical developments are not coherent for this concept and do
not align with MSWM and a CE because zero-waste perceptions are
limited, as even in closed-loop systems, resources are consumed
and at least some waste is certainly produced ( Blomsma and
Brennan, 2017 ;Niero and Kalbar, 2019 ). In lieu of this discussion,
the role of MSWM in a CE is irreplaceable and important for
guaranteeing the precision of this supplementary approach.
2.2. Circular economy
A CE is a business operationalization concept whose imple-
mentation for sustainable development has been much debated.
The concept stems from the Earth ’s limited capability to acclimatize
to contamination in reaction to the necessity of economic devel-
opment and resource consumption along with environmental in-
ﬂuences ( Korhonen et al., 2018a ).Jiao and Boons (2014) indicated
that the concept involves the actions of reducing, reusing, and
recycling in the progression of production, consumption and cir-
culation. Van Buren et al. (2016) proposed creating a triple bottom
line with the social, environmental and economic dimensions of a
CE.Mendoza et al. (2017) stated that a CE should take full advantage
of resource ef ﬁciency, including (1) conserving and improving
natural wealth by monitoring
ﬁnite stocks and assessing renewable
resource ﬂows; (2) optimizing resource utility, products, processes,
and materials within technological and biological circularity; and
(3) promoting ef ﬁcient coordination by disclosing and controlling
undesirable externalities. Ness and Xing (2017) suggested that a CE
aims to achieve more value and to reduce material throughput by
involving resource utilization and management, closed-loop ap-
proaches, adaptation strategies, and sharing economy models.F.M. Tsai, T.-D. Bui, M.-L. Tseng et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 275 (2020) 124132
2