(POF) and ozone depletion (OD). HT captures the poten-
tial harm of substances released to air, including carcinogens. Res-
piratory and cardiovascular diseases have both been shown to be
exacerbated and caused by PMF in the air, which is also attributed
to causing impaired infant lung development ( Kim et al., 2015 ).
POF or ‘‘summer smog”, and particularly tropospheric ozone, has
also been shown to reduce lung function, exacerbate respiratory
conditions, such as asthma, and cause long term tissue damage
(Amann, 2008 ). Finally, OD increases the level of solar UV-B radia-
tion on the earth, which has the potential to increase the inci-
dences of skin cancers, genetic damage and macular
degeneration; increased UV-B radiation also has the beneﬁt of
increasing vitamin D levels in humans ( Norval et al., 2011 ).
Therefore, these impacts have been assigned to the health
aspect in the base case and all other scenarios ( Table 1 ). In addi-
tion, GWP is assigned to this aspect in Scenarios 2 and 3. This is
due to climate change endangering human health through the
increased occurrence of extreme weather events, such as heat
waves, droughts and hurricanes, and by changing the distribution
of allergens and infectious diseases ( Franchini and Mannucci,
2015 ).
2.3. The nexus methodology and multi-criteria decision analysis
An alternative method for estimating the total environmental
impact within the FEWH nexus would be to use one of the
multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) methods instead. To
explore how the proposed nexus method compares to MCDA and
whether the results of the illustrative case study differ between
the two, multi-attribute value theory ( Azapagic and Perdan,
2005b ) has been used in this study. As an illustration, only the base
case is considered, with the same allocation of the impacts in the
MCDA as in the nexus methodology; this is illustrated in the deci-
sion tree in Fig. 2 .
The scores for the four aspects are weighted and summed up to
determine an overall nexus impact as follows:EInexus¼XA
a¼1sa ð4Þ
In this case, the nexus impact can range from 0 (the lowest) to 1
(highest). Note that, in congruence with the nexus methodology,
all the aspects are assumed to have equal importance.
The aspect scores are estimated according to:
sa¼XN
n¼1wnEI0
n;a ð5Þ
where the normalised LCA impact EI’ n,aallocated to aspect ais esti-
mated using Eq. (1).
2.4. Illustrative case study: recovery of resources from food waste
To illustrate the nexus methodology, the case study considers
the life cycle environmental impact on the FEWH nexus of four
options for food waste management used widely in the European
Union ( Manfredi and Pant, 2011 ), each of which recovers energy
and/or material resources: anaerobic digestion (AD), in-vessel
composting (IVC), incineration and landﬁlling. The functional unit
is deﬁned as the ‘‘treatment of 1 tonne of household food waste”
and the system boundaries are given in Fig. 3 . The study is based
in the UK. A brief description of the waste treatment methods is
given below; for the original LCA results and further details, see
Slorach et al. (2019) .
Anaerobic digestion : AD of food waste takes place at a commer-
cial facility with an annual capacity of 25,000 t/yr. The produced
biogas is burned on-site in a combined heat and power engine with
the excess electricity exported to the grid for which the system is
credited. The digestate is used in agriculture, with the credits for
displacing an equivalent amount of mineral fertiliser.
In-vessel composting : A rotating drum is used to manage the
composting of food waste at a 50,000 t/yr facility. The facility hasa controlled atmosphere with scrubbers to limit air emissions
and odours. The waste is retained in the drums for four days before
being matured in open air windrows. The compost is applied in
agriculture and the system is credited for displacing mineral
fertilisers.
Incineration : The incineration process takes place in a large scale
facility (300,000 t/yr) using a moving grate furnace, where the food
waste is embedded in general municipal solid waste. The heat in
combustion gases is used to produce steam, which drives a turbine
to generate electricity; the process is credited for displacing the
grid electricity. The ﬂue gases are treated before release to the
atmosphere, including removal of ﬂy ash, which is sent to landﬁll
together with bottom ashes.
Landﬁlling : A modern sanitary landﬁll is considered with a con-
tained system to capture landﬁll gas (68% capture rate) and collect
leachate for wastewater treatment. A gas engine is used to gener-
ate electricity from the gas for exporting to the grid; the system is
credited for displacing the equivalent grid electricity.
The LCA impacts of these options were estimated previously by
Slorach et al. (2019) using the ReCiPe V1.08 methodology. These
are summarised in Table 1 , together with their allocations to the
different nexus aspects (as discussed in Section 2.2).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Overall impact on the nexus
The impacts on the nexus of the four food waste treatment
options, estimated using Eqs. (1)–(3), are illustrated in the nexus
quadrilaterals in Fig. 4 for the base case and Scenarios 1–3, with
the total nexus impacts summarised in Table S1 in the Supplemen-
tary Information (SI). For the full details of the estimations, see
Table S2 and Figures S1-S4 in the SI. In all the cases, it is assumedFig. 2. MCDA decision tree for the four aspects of the FEWH nexus. (The allocation
of the impacts to the different nexus aspects is the same as in the base case for the
nexus methodology (see Table 1 ). The values in brackets represent the weights
assumed for the aspects and the impacts, based on equal importance of each. Forthe impacts acronyms, see Nomenclature).P.C. Slorach et al. / Waste Management 113 (2020) 359–368 363