onal Journal of Production Economics 239 (2021) 108209
2Development Goal (SDG 12.3) to “by 2030, halve per capita global food 
waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along pro-
duction and supply chains, including post-harvest losses ” (Flanagan et al., 
2018 ). 
As the instrumental role in the transition towards the CE, FLW has 
gained momentum in the CE-related academic discourse with expo-
nential growth in related publications over the last five years (Kyr-
iakopoulos et al., 2019 ). To better position our study and highlight our 
contribution to this significant and ever-increasing published research 
base, we have examined a considerable amount of extant literature that 
deals with FLW in the CE. Appendix 1 presents a summary of these 
studies, providing authors ’ names, year of publication, the number of 
articles reviewed and main focuses in term of stages of the supply chain, 
waste prevention and management options, and the considered evalu -
ation criteria. The earliest was published in 2014. This extensive list is 
grouped into seven focused topic areas: (i) FLW conversion technologies 
(ii) biorefinery models (iii) life cycle assessment (LCA) methods for FLW 
prevention and management routes (iv) methods for quantifying the 
FLW flows (v) FLW-related policies (vi) the FLW hierarchy framework 
(vii) FLW prevention behaviours. The difference between the first two 
topics lies in the cascading concept, where the former focuses on a 
specific technology, while the latter aims at a combination of multiple 
technologies for a plethora of outputs. Although the prior literature re-
views represent the crucial starting point for our study, two limitations 
are identified. First, their focus is constrained to a specific topic area, 
predominantly focused on technological feasibility in a fragmented 
manner. Since FLW in the CE thinking is a complex and multi-faceted 
issue that cannot be attributed to a single variable (Schanes et al., 
2018 ; Kyriakopoulos et al., 2019 ), a singular or micro perspective is not 
recommended. Otherwise, the CE discourse is simply a refurbished 
notion of the triple R principle – reduce, reuse, recycle, where a single 
solution is chosen according to the environmental criteria (Crist ˘obal 
et al., 2018a , 2018b ; Ingrao et al., 2018 ), while economic and social 
evaluations, as well as the optimal cascade of individual bioprocesses for 
the authentic transformation of the linear to the circular economy 
(Dahiya et al., 2018 ) are completely neglected. Second, the review 
protocol in many cases is not illustrated. As such, most papers either do 
not mention the number of reviewed articles or review a limited set of 
articles with unclear selection criteria. This narrative method of syn-
thesising previous studies is criticised as being devoid of replicability, 
transparency and thoroughness and thus can be biased by the re-
searchers in making sense of extant literature (Tranfield et al., 2003 ). 
We, therefore, attempt to overcome these limitations. 
As shown in Appendix 1, our scope includes the above-mentioned 
topic areas in order to provide a comprehensive literature review. We 
considered 297 articles published in all areas of focus and all stages of 
the supply chain, irrespective of the chosen FLW prevention and man-
agement options that are linked to the CE and FLW. We have chosen a 
systematic literature review (SLR) method over other review approaches 
because of its replicable and transparent process, which contributes to 
giving a balanced and unbiased result (Tranfield et al., 2003 ). The main 
objectives of this extensive review are threefold: (i) to offer an analytical 
overview of existing research relying on bibliometric tools, such as 
keyword co-occurrence analysis; (ii) to carry out the structural dimen -
sion analysis on research methodology, FLW types, FLW prevention and 
management options with the associated opportunities and challenges, 
and sustainability assessment indicators; (iii) to derive a taxonomy 
framework for the classification of the critical aspects of the reviewed 
papers and offer potential future research avenues. 
After the introduction, the paper proceeds as follows. Theoretical 
background (Section 2) sheds light on the FLW definitional scoping, 
concept of CE and its relevant principles in FLW prevention and man-
agement. The SLR methodology is presented in Section 3, which is fol-
lowed by a keyword co-occurrence network analysis to identify 
emerging research themes (Section 4) and structural dimension analysis 
to critically appraise different relevant dimensions (Section 5). The discussion (Section 6) encapsulates current research lines and proposes 
the research agenda. The conclusions and limitations of this study are 
presented in Section 7. 
2.Theoretical background 
2.1. FLW definitional scoping – a review boundary 
Clearly stating the boundaries of the topic is essential when per-
forming a SLR. This is of great importance due to a lack of consensus 
with reference to a precise definition of food loss and waste resulting in 
an interchangeable use of the concepts of loss and waste (FAO, 2019 ). 
The existence of multiple FLW definitions complicates the data collec -
tion and comparability of FLW levels (Corrado and Sala, 2018 ), chal-
lenges the measure of the distance towards the SDG 12.3 target 
(Teigiserova et al., 2020 ), and hampers the analysis of FLW (FAO, 2019 ). 
FLW definitions are different in two major aspects: the types of wastes 
(edible and inedible1 parts of foods) and the boundaries in the FSC to be 
included (Corrado and Sala, 2018 ). For instance, FAO (2019, p. 4) define 
FLW as “the decrease in quantity or quality of food along the food supply 
chain ”, but distinguish food loss from food waste based on the stages of 
the FSC. Food loss refers to the amount of the edible parts of crops, 
livestock and fish leaving the upper part of the FSC – from the 
post-harvesting, slaughtering, and catching stage up to but not including 
the retail stage – by being discarded or disposed of or incinerated (FAO, 
2019 ). These stages typically consist of storage, transportation, pro-
cessing and importing activities. Food waste arises at the downstream 
stages from retail to the consumption points. Of note, the FLW ’s scope 
under the FAO ’s conceptual framework excludes not only inedible parts 
of foods but also the edible foods that are destined to an economically 
productive non-food use, such as animal feeds or industrial use. FU-
SIONS (2014) , on the other hand, does include both edible and inedible 
parts of foods in its proposed FLW definition, but it does not distinguish 
food loss and food waste. FUSIONS (2014, p. 6) defined food waste as 
foods that “are removed from (lost to or diverted from) the food supply 
chain ” and flow into nine destinations. FUSIONS (2014) also highlighted 
the difference between food surplus and food waste . Although food sur-
plus is still a part of FSC and fit for human consumption, it would end up 
as waste if no prevention or reuse is carried out. As a result, prevention 
and redistribution to humans are only applicable to food surplus (Ng 
et al., 2019 ). While the paper acknowledges differences between various 
concepts, the scope of FLW terminology used hereinafter in this review 
paper will encompass food losses, food wastes, edible and inedible 
portions of food loss and wastes as well as food surplus that arise from all 
stages of the FSC. 
2.2. Circular economy concept 
A circular economy is defined as “an industrial system that is restorative 
or regenerative by intention and design ” (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 
2012 , p. 7). According to Bocken et al. (2016) , the CE includes strategies 
for closing, slowing or narrowing resource loops. Closing completes a 
resource circle by connecting the post-use of a resource with the pro-
duction stage via recycling, while slowing loops reduces the speed of 
resource flow by extending the in-use period with long-life design 
and/or maintenance, repairs, remanufacturing services. Finally, nar-
rowing the loop means lowering resources embedded in each product. 
The CE concept cannot be traced back to any particular authors or 
dates but is rather considered as the synthesis of various schools of 
thought, prominently cradle-to-cradle philosophy, performance econ-
omy, blue economy, biomimicry, and industrial ecology (Ghisellini 
et al., 2016 ; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017 ; Merli et al., 2018 ). The 
cradle-to-cradle philosophy fosters the superior design of products for 
1 For example: shells, peels, bones, pulps, husks, leaves, pomaces. Q. Do et al.