able Circular Economy Approach for Smart W aste Management System to 
achieve sustainable development goals :  Case Study in Indonesia 
 
Yun Arifatul Fatimah a Kannan Govindan b, c,1  Rochiyati Murniningsih a 
 Agus Setiawan a 
aUniversitas Muhammadiyah Magelang, Engineering Facu lty, Magelang, Indonesia  
bChina Institute of FTZ Supply Chain, Shanghai Marit ime University, Shanghai, 201306, China 
cCenter for Sustainable Supply Chain Engineering, De partment of Technology and Innovation, Danish 
Institute for Advanced Study, University of Souther n Denmark, Campusvej 55, Odense M, Denmark 
 
Abstract 
Indonesia is facing a number of independently manag ed challenges related to the 
collection, transportation, processing (composting,  recycling), and landfill dependence 
on waste management. An intervention is needed to b ring stakeholders together to 
solve these waste challenges. The objectives of this study are to investigate the  fundamental 
issues and opportunities and to develop a sustainab le and smart country-wide waste 
management system. The system should provide a mult i-dimensional approach, determine the 
maturity level of the waste management system in a technical method, and pursue the goal of 
designing a new strategy to minimise waste manageme nt problems. A comprehensive 
systematic literature review, intensive focus group  discussions, and direct observation 
in Indonesian cities were approaches used to develo p waste management business 
processes and their system design. Waste business p rocesses consist of mixed-
collecting, sorting, transporting, varied-treatment , and chained-disposal. The design of 
the proposed waste management system presents circu lar economy processes that can 
separate municipal waste, identify waste characteri stics, and determine sustainable 
waste treatment technologies through the use of Int ernet of Thing (IoT) as the 
integrator. This study contributes to the sustainable developme nt goals (SDG’s) such as Good 
health, and wellbeing (SDG 3); Clean water and sani tation (SDG 6); Decent Work and 
Economic Growth (SDG 8); Responsible Consumption an d Production (SDG 12) and Climate 
Action (SDG 13). The study proposes a new design of smart and sustai nable waste 
management which could achieve satisfactory economi c, social, and environmental 
waste management performances.  
Keywords:  Sustainability; Sustainable circular economy; Smart waste management;  
                                                      
1 Corresponding author. China Institute of FTZ Suppl y Chain, Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai, 20 1306, China. 
kgov@iti.sdu.dk