inger Nature Switzerland AG 2019 
M.-L. Franco-García et al. (eds.), Towards Zero Waste , Greening of Industry 
Networks Studies 6, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92931-6_13Chapter 13
The Future of Circular Economy and  
Zero Waste
María-Laura Franco-García, Jorge Carlos Carpio-Aguilar, 
and Hans Bressers
Abstract  This chapter provides a reflective analysis of the contributions focusing 
on how the chapters contribute to circular economy in two main themes that will 
define the future of circular economy research: challenges and opportunities and 
effective collaboration with stakeholders. Lessons learned and commonalities are 
also discussed to finally draw some conclusions and recommendations to further 
elaborate the research agenda of this field.
Keywords  Circular economy · Collaboration with stakeholders · Zero waste
13.1  Country-Specific Challenges and Opportunities
One of the lessons from the chapters is that challenges and opportunities have been 
so far somewhat generically described in the literature, which tends to assume a 
universal view of challenges and opportunities, where the lessons from developed 
countries can be without a problem translated to developing countries. We argue 
that a more contingent approach is needed, taking into account deep structural, 
institutional and cultural differences between countries. In other words, our under -
standing of circular economy (CE) challenges and opportunities needs to be geo -
graphically and socially embedded to understand country-specific differences. 
Accordingly, in Chap. 2, Dieleman and Martínez analysed opportunities and chal -
lenges of CE in Mexico from a wide systemic perspective inspired by the concept 
of national innovation systems and its emphasis on distinctiveness of contextual 
conditions. To frame their discussion, they used the components of such concept, 
i.e. (i) “market trends and conditions”; (ii) “competitiveness and productivity”; (iii) 
M.-L. Franco-García ( *) · H. Bressers 
University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
e-mail:  m.l.francogarcia@utwente.nl ; j.t.a.bressers@utwente.nl  
J. C. Carpio-Aguilar 
Walmart Mexico, CDMX, Mexico
e-mail:  jorge.carpio@walmart.com