f Cleaner Production 316 (2021) 128297
3attention among researchers worldwide. Broadly, consumer behavior 
focusing on e-waste can be categorized into several areas: consumption, 
storage, repair and reuse (R&R), disposal, and recycling (Bovea, M.D. 
et al., 2018 ). Knowledge and awareness about the formal collection 
system among consumers are also critical aspects that determine the 
sustainability of the system in the socio-economic sphere. Several 
studies, such as the study by Islam et al. (2020a) , Ramzan et al. (2019) , 
Saphores et al. (2007) and others, emphasized the issue. E-waste-related 
policy, management system architecture, country-specific consumer 
culture and behavior, and availability of a diverse range of product 
categories in the market and their interaction with consumers create a 
complex phenomenon defining and connecting building blocks and 
definitions of circular economy with a sustainable e-waste management 
system. Literature related to the consumer behaviors around e-waste is 
proliferating; however, no comprehensive review article is found that 
analyzed all the behaviors to spot the future research directions and 
developing a consumer-centric circular economy framework focusing on 
e-waste. This paper tries to eliminate such gaps by reviewing 109 articles 
published between 2005 and March 2021 using content analysis meth -
odology. The main research questions (RQs) of the article are: 
RQ 1: How do the issues related to consumer awareness and 
behavior with a particular focus on the e-waste sector contribute to the 
essential operational framework in achieving a CE? 
RQ 2: How can the general understanding contribute to informing 
policymakers and researchers in identifying future policy measures to be 
taken and the necessity of performing research studies in the area? 
After reviewing articles published on consumer behavior around e- 
waste in Section 4, a consumer-centric CE framework is proposed with 
policy implications and business model innovation under Section 5. 
With this, RQ 1 was answered. Based on the in-depth literature review of 
the selected articles, research gaps were identified, proposing critical 
future research directions in Section 5.3, by which RQ 2 was addressed. 
The research contributions of this review article are: (1) it provided a 
guide or reference for future researchers to accumulate all the infor-
mation and knowledge surrounding consumer behavior-related topics 
focusing on e-waste; (2) it attempted to propose measures achieving a 
circular economy more holistically, from a framework perspective 
focusing on sustainable consumer behavior and e-waste. In many cases, 
published papers did not consider the CE concept into their central 
research theme, focusing instead on various behavioral aspects. The 
framework incorporated behavior-specific aspects into CE pathways, 
creating interdisciplinary research opportunities in the field; (3) besides, 
presenting, a quantitative assessment of the research progress in the 
field, the article provided a transparent and replicable methodology, 
which could also be utilized collecting materials from other available 
databases; (4) in this paper issues related to policy and business model innovation are discussed, respectively, which provide suggestions for 
both researchers and policymakers in system-level development and 
future research areas; and (5) on the research topic, potential future 
research directions have been identified, which could be useful for 
future researchers. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 dis-
cusses some earlier review articles. Section 3 describes the research 
methodology. An in-depth analysis of the literature is presented in 
Section 4. Results and discussion are illustrated in Section 5. Finally, 
Section 6 ends with the conclusion. 
2.Literature review 
To clarify the need of this review article, some of the previously 
published review articles worth mentioning. Table 2 provides details of 
the previous articles on the topic which also helped to perform a 
structured literature review based on the content analysis methodology. 
Details of the methodology is described in Section 3. 
Based on Table 2, it is evident that in recent time, no comprehensive 
literature review article has been published on all the consumers ’ 
behavioral aspects focusing on e-waste. Scopes of the articles also 
showed that consideration of various product types was not given in the 
previous review articles, and issues were discussed more in the local 
context. Thus, a significant knowledge gap exists in understanding a 
holistic picture of consumers ’ behavior around e-waste. This is the first 
attempt at reviewing consumer awareness, and behavior focused on e- 
waste, considering all the behavioral aspects to the best of the authors ’ 
knowledge. 
3.Research methodology 
According to Easterby-Smith et al. (2012) and Brocke et al. (2009) , a 
literature review plays a critical role in understanding and exploring a 
specific research field ’s structure. New theory development and inves -
tigation scope could further progress the knowledge base by identifying 
a useful literature review (Machi and McEvoy, 2016 ). In this study, the 
four-steps systematic literature review technique proposed by Mayring 
(2001) under the qualitative content analysis method is utilized. Fig. 3 
shows the four steps process model for the content analysis method 
consisting of material collection, descriptive analysis, category selec-
tion, and material evaluation. Mayring (2014) provided an extensive 
discussion on the method. Previously, several literature review articles 
have applied the research methodology to e-waste research (e.g., Wati 
and Koo (2010) ; Islam and Huda (2018b) ; Islam and Huda (2019b) ; 
Ismail and Hanafiah (2020) ; Ismail and Hanafiah (2019) ; P˘erez-Belis 
et al. (2015b) ). Table 1 
WEEE product categories with targets of EU WEEE Directive, 2012 /19/EU, adapted from P˘erez-Belis et al. (2015b) , Islam and Huda (2018b) and (StEP, 2019 ).  
Sl. 
No. E-waste category Sample e-waste product Target 
Recovered 
(%) Prepared for re-use 
or recycled (%) 
1 Temperature exchange equipment Temperature exchange equipment, more commonly referred to as cooling and freezing 
equipment: refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners (ACs), heat pumps 85 80 
2 Screens, monitors, equip. 
withsurface screens F100 cm2 Televisions, monitors, laptops, notebooks, and tablets 80 70 
3 Lamps Fluorescent lamps, high intensity discharge lamps, and light emitting diode (LED) lamps – 80 
4 Large equipment (LE) Washing machines (WM), clothes dryers, dish-washing machines, electric stoves, large 
printing machines, copying equipment, and photovoltaic panels 85 80 
5 Small equipment (SE) Vacuum cleaners, microwaves, ventilation equipment, toasters, electric kettles, electric 
shavers, scales, calculators, radio sets, video cameras, electrical and electronic (EE) toys, 
small electrical and electronic (SEE) tools, small medical devices, small monitoring, and 
control instruments 75 55 
6 Small IT and telecommunication 
equipment Mobile phones (MPs), Global Positioning Systems (GPS), pocket calculators, routers, 
personal computers (PCs)/desktop computers (DCs), printers, telephones 75 55  M.T. Islam et al.