een widely used in practice-theoretical research on food waste or sustain-
able consumption, apart from Hawkins’ (2006) research concerning the ethicalrelationship to waste. Thus, this article deepens the understanding of ethical sub-jectivity in practice-theoretical research on food waste.
Moral economies and the constitution of ethical subjectivity
in food waste reduction practices
We approach the transition towards the CE in everyday practices through the
concept of moral economy. Gregson et al. (2015) have pointed out, in theirresearch concerning the CE and resource recovery in the EU, that a CE is a
moral economy, since there are right and wrong ways to circulate materials.
By referring to the discussion concerning moral economy, we aim to highlightthat the practices, institutions and policies connected to the CE create moral cat-egories in the mundane practices of everyday life. These categories could be
expressed, for example, through obligations such as recycling food waste.
Thus, the concept of moral economy is useful in understanding the transition tothe CE at the level of everyday life.
Our analysis on the moralities of the CE is guided by Foucault’s (1994) con-
ception of ethics as arts of existence. Foucault (1994) states that the self is not givento us and that to become ethical subjects, we have to constitute ourselves as ethical
beings. For Foucault (1994), the constitution of the ethical self is not self-centred
action – it is about creating an ethos , a way relating to others. He divides the arts of
existence into four techniques of the self: ethical substance, mode of subjectivation,self-forming activity and telos (Foucault, 1994: 263–266). Ethical substance refers
to the part of the self that is worked over by ethics, in other words, the matter of
the ethical work (Foucault, 1994: 263–264). The mode of subjectivation means ‘theway in which people are invited or incited to recognize their moral obligations’(Foucault, 1994: 264). Self-forming activity refers to the measures we take to mod-
erate ourselves as ethical subjects. The fourth dimension, telos, means the objective
of our moral behaviour (Foucault, 1994: 263–266).
Foucault’s conceptualization of ethical subjectivity adds to the understanding of
the ethical practices of food consumption and the CE as a moral economy byshowing the concrete work consumers do to evaluate, sustain and transformtheir practices. Through this, it enables us to address the possibilities for consumer
agency in the context of the transformation to a CE. Referring to Foucault (2003),
the ways in which people form ethical subjectivity are not invented by the individ-uals themselves. Rather, they are based on the models suggested by society, socialgroup, or culture (Foucault, 2003). Thus, using Foucault’s conception enables us
to take a look not only at the ways our participants act as individuals but also at
the modes of ethical action suggested more widely in the surrounding society orculture. It also allows us to examine the limitations that practices bring to theenactment of ethical behaviour and how these difﬁculties in following moralLehtokunnas et al. 5