highest circular economy benefits (food, pollu tion, and energy). In Egypt, the MW is not 
separated or sorted at source before collection, bu t waste pickers remove recyclables at disposal 
sites prior to collection processes by municipaliti es. The growing stream of MW in Egypt, either 
solid or food wastes, requires a sustainable waste management strategy  (Egypt's Vision 2030 
Website, 2016), in addition to raising people’s and  organizational awareness towards this problem 
(Elmenofi et al., 2015). To adopt separated waste c ollection schemes and for raising public 
awareness, implementation of the PAYT accounting ap proach is essential. There are three 
technical pillars to implementing the PAYT approach : identifying the waste generator, measuring 
the waste amount that needs treatment, and unit pri cing per emptying household and/or per kg or 
tonne. Both councils and households would get direc t benefits of a cost-effective MW 
management system. Therefore, this study contribute s to highlighting the best collection method 
that leads to the lowest cost and maximum benefit f or all interested parties in MW management 
systems in Egypt by considering direct and indirect  benefits to achieve sustainability. A second 
benefit is to support the design and the applicatio n of the effective PAYT accounting approach for 
pricing MW collection systems in Egypt by integrati ng economic, environmental and social 
aspects which are still lacking in the literature a nd in real practice. The proposed PAYT model 
aims to fill this gap by designing an integrated fr amework to support policy makers and waste 
managers in the adoption of PAYT schemes. It can cr eate substantial economic, social & 
environmental benefits for industry, energy & food security, especially if it is managed properly 
with reasonable implementation of an integrated sus tainable weight-based or volume-based 
PAYT costing approach.  Such an accounting approach  is still lacking in the literature and real 
practice in Egypt. Therefore, it is expected that t he paper would contribute to the reevaluation of 
the current policy measures and the modification of  the pricing policy design for municipalities. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:  Section 2 briefly highlights the 
existing Egyptian municipal waste management and st rategic vision 2030 for adopting the 
circular economy approach. Section 3 describes the methodology undertaken for an integrated 
sustainable framework for the PAYT accounting model  for pricing MW collection systems, 
Section 4 extends the comparative analysis of the r esults and discussion with a suggested PAYT 
scenario implementation in Egypt (two suggested PAY T methods, i.e. weight-based pricing 
model and volume-based pricing model, have been pro posed for implementation in Egypt). 
Finally, Section 5 proceeds with conclusions of the  study. 
Journal Pre-proof