This chapter ﬁrst discusses the results and assumptions used in the
study. Second, the limitations of the methodology are reviewed.
The system boundaries in this study exclude the household level,
with storage in refrigerators and food preparation. As the meal leftover
fraction stands for the largest share of avoidable food waste, its pre-
vention would also in ﬂuence the amount of energy consumed. Further,
the study did not account for the rebound e ﬀect. As households spend
less on food when food waste is prevented, the environmental impacts
might be reallocated with spending on other products. This aspect
should be taken into account for a holistic environmental policy de-
velopment.
Comparing avoided emissions from improved waste management
systems with the ones obtained from food waste prevention o ﬀer in-
sights in the environmental potential of upstream versus downstreamclimate change mitigation strategies. In that regard, prevention strate-
gies clearly result in larger bene ﬁts than recycling strategies. 30% re-
duction in avoidable food waste gave more than 5 times larger bene ﬁts
than what was obtained with improved recycling strategies in the CS
scenario. It must be noted that these conclusions are based on the as-
sumption that a reduction in food waste leads to a reduction of food
production. Avoided emission from the food production process was
hence the determining factor for the overall bene ﬁts of food waste
prevention, as observed also by Bernstad and Andersson (2015) ;
Gentil, Gallo, and Christensen (2011) andMatsuda et al. (2012) . There
is however a risk that the amount of food waste prevented at thehousehold level will arise higher up in the food chain, e.g. at the retailor production level. Such a shift in waste production will hence not
prevent any GHG emissions –it is then necessary to have good waste
management recycling systems in place, and therefrom avoid emissionsthrough substituting carbon intensive products.
Combining prevention measures and a switch to AD would, none-
theless, o ﬀer optimal solutions for food waste management based onI. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160 (2020) 104908
6