lists available at ScienceDirect
Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/resources-conservation-and-recycling-x
Behavioral change for the circular economy: A review with focus on
electronic waste management in the EU
Keshav Parajulya,b,*, Colin Fitzpatrickb, Orla Muldoonc, Ruediger Kuehra
aUnited Nations University, Vice Rectorate in Europe, Sustainable Cycles Programme (SCYCLE), Platz der Vereinten Nationen 1, 53113, Bonn, Germany
bDept. of Electronic & Computer Engineering, University of Limerick, Limerick, V94 T9PX, Ireland
cDept. of Psychology, University of Limerick, Limerick, V94 T9PX, Ireland
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Consumer behavior
Circular economyE-wasteWEEEElectronic wasteSustainable consumptionBehavior changeABSTRACT
In recent years, electrical and electronic products (e-products) have been central to the discussion of resource
sustainability due to their growing demand, use of critical resources, and challenges in managing the resultingwaste stream (e-waste). As such, the concept of circular economy, which seeks to ‘design out ’waste by better
products, practices and business models, is deemed to be very relevant for e-products. The nature of circularsystems mandates a collective eﬀ ort of businesses, consumers, and governments. While the techno-economic
sides of the circular economy have attracted large attention in recent years, the role of consumer behavior –a
critical factor in de ﬁning the long-term success of ‘sustainable production and consumption ’initiatives –remains
less explored. In this context, this paper explores the potential of integrating lessons from behavioral sciences tofacilitate circular economy in e-waste management. It o ﬀers a review of prominent behavioral theories and their
application in the context of sustainable consumption and pro-environmental behaviors. Finally, the paper
identiﬁes opportunities for behavioral interventions in improving e-waste management and in achieving a more
circular economy.
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Electrical and electronic products (e-products) have been one of the
focus areas in the discussion of resource sustainability mainly due to a)
their growing demand, b) the use of critical resources, and c) challenges
in properly managing the end-of-life (EoL) for e-products (known as e-
waste) ( Breivik et al., 2014 ;Habib et al., 2015 ). E-waste is a fast-
growing waste stream globally, which with the current trend, is ex-pected to double by 2045 ( Parajuly et al., 2019 ). E-waste is also a
mixture of valuable resources and toxic substances that demandscareful handling. E-products have evolved to become complex and
ubiquitous in everyday lives but e-waste collection and management
systems have not caught up –largely failing to ensure proper handling
of e-waste. This entails potential risks of resource losses and negativeimpacts on environment as well as human health ( Wang et al., 2016b ).
Governments and other actors have taken actions to tackle the
growing e-waste problem. In Europe, for example, the Waste Electrical
and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive sets targets for collectionand subsequent processing of e-waste for material recovery ( European
Parliament, 2003 ). The Directive mandates all member states of the
European Union to facilitate separate collection of and resource re-covery from e-waste. More importantly, the system based on Extended
Producer Responsibility (EPR) principle has made producers re-
sponsible for their e-products with the aim of improving recyclability
and encouraging the integration of EoL aspects during product design
(Atasu, 2018 ). For more than two decades, concepts such as ‘design-for-
recycling ’have also been in circulation ( Kriwet et al., 1995 ) and more
recently, the European Ecodesign Directive has begun to set design
requirements for energy-related products to include all stages of pro-
duct lifecycle, including product EoL ( European Parliament, 2009).
The results of these collective e ﬀorts, however, have not been sa-
tisfactory. Despite relatively well-established waste management in-
frastructure in place, European countries only collect about one third of
the generated e-waste under the o ﬃcial collection systems with sig-
niﬁcant quantities going to non-compliant waste management channels
(Balde et al., 2015). As for products themselves, little evidence of design
supporting EoL resource recovery exists. Classic design ﬂaws are still
found even in modern e-products ( Parajuly et al., 2016). Due to their
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcrx.2020.100035
Received 15 August 2019; Received in revised form 20 November 2019; Accepted 24 February 2020⁎Corresponding author at: United Nations University, Vice Rectorate in Europe, Sustainable Cycles Programme (SCYCLE), Platz der Vereinten Nationen 1, 53113,
Bonn, Germany.
E-mail address: parajuly@vie.unu.edu (K. Parajuly).Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6 (2020) 100035
Available online 25 February 2020
2590-289X/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T