With this article we contribute to the increasing l iterature in CE by bringing it to a still 
under-studied specific phenomenon – fast moving con sumers good packaging. Moreover, we 
bridge CE with new technologies, and thus advance o ur knowledge on how new technologies 
can enhance and leverage CE framework and practices . We also contribute to the theoretical 
discussion of product life cycle by expanding it to  a resources value loop  as corporations 
need to integrate their products with its packaging .  The idea of looking at product and 
packaging separately needs to be abandoned.  Finall y, we advance the participatory 
theoretical models backed by a framework that demon strate the practical approach that can be 
taken to apply the principles of CE at the grassroo ts level. Indeed, these models are yet to be 
conceptualized in the context of EEs, even though i ts need is paramount from a world 
sustainability perspective.  
2. Literature Review 
2.1 Stakeholders Theory 
In the modern business context, there has been a tr ansference in objectives of organizations 
from a focus on profitability of the shareholders a nd the maximization of profits towards the 
concern of a more global satisfaction of all stakeh olders, allowing concepts such as corporate 
social responsibility (CSR) and CE to develop.  Hav ing that in mind, the Stakeholder Theory 
(Friedman, 1970) argues that the ultimate test for the company would be to successfully 
satisfy all the demands of the multiple stakeholder s instead of accomplishing conventional 
economic and financial criteria (Mitchell et al., 1 997), where stakeholders are “any group or 
individual who can affect or is affected by the ach ievement of the organization’s objectives” 
(Freeman 2010, p. 24). The Stakeholder Theory attem pts to balance the added value and 
benefits that the different stakeholders exchange w ith firms (Carroll, 2004).  Furthermore, the 
acknowledged importance of the “well-being” of the natural and social environment in which 
the companies are inserted leads them to take a str ategic approach to CSR in response to 
Journal Pre-proof