f Cleaner Production 321 (2021) 128969
5demands of CE CW to some extent, often under the guise of different 
concepts such as (in)convenience, effort, domestic labour and/or co- 
creation. However, these different concepts make it challenging to un-
dertake direct comparisons between examples. As such, CW has thus far 
not been studied systematically in the CE context, beyond Wheeler and 
Glucksmann ’s research on domestic recycling (ibid.). This is a notable 
gap, as supposed benefits, like added convenience, represent an 
important value proposition for CE proponents. And yet the actual work 
consumers need to undertake, to invest in new practices compared to 
traditional (‘linear ’) modes of provision, remains under-explored. While 
CE advocates make claims of ‘hassle-free ’ services, studies show there is 
often significant effort required in doing repairs, purchasing second- 
hand, or participating in peer-to-peer sharing. How these all add up to 
helping create the ‘circular consumer ’ (or not) remains to be seen. 
There are several areas of research that stem from the above point. 
For one—while case studies of recycling, product service systems, and 
sharing platforms make up the bulk of the literature —it is notable that 
the practices of leasing, purchasing long-lasting products, co-ownership, 
and pooling are understudied (Wieser, 2019 ). This is a clear omission, as 
many of these practices are heavily implicated in current CE debates and 
policies. For example, the EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy 
considers prolonging product lifetimes as an important component of 
the CE (European Commission, 2015 ), exemplified in the 2019 ‘Right to 
Repair ’ legislation, which is a part of this overall strategy (Ehgartner and 
Hirth, 2019 ; Harrabin, 2019b ). Therefore, question here include what 
forms of CW are involved in realising this goal; how are the prerequisites 
for this work (e.g. access to information) currently distributed; and what 
is needed, to address any barriers that additional CW might create for 
consumers? 
As well as particular practices that require further research, various 
components of CW are also under-studied. For one, some consumer 
engagements with the CE involve degrees of skill and creativity. While 
research has shown these can be lacking in some areas — e.g. identifying 
long-lasting products at the point of purchase —other research outlines 
how experience over time enables consumers to feel confident and 
competent in engaging with particular modes of consumption e.g. when 
shopping at second hand markets (Crewe and Gregson, 1998 ). In addi-
tion, CW can entail forms of emotional work that are only partially 
explored in research to date. For one, some CE modes of provision 
appear to make consumers feel obliged to take care of, and be respon -
sible for, the condition of goods. One example can be found in a refillable 
milk bottle scheme (Vaughan et al., 2007 ) where consumers took extra 
care of, and felt some stewardship towards, the reused and returned 
bottles even though this was not required for them to participate in the 
service. However, other studies report the opposite effect i.e. consumers 
taking less care with sequentially accessed goods (e.g. Bardhi and Eck-
hardt, 2012 ). This suggests that more attention needs to be paid to 
variations across different modes of provisioning, and in what ways 
consumers (are made to) feel responsible for the goods that pass through 
their hands, plus the impacts all of the above have on the take-up of new 
practices. 
One notable feature of the research to date has been how it often 
examines one consumption practice at a time e.g. repairing goods, 
renting goods, or participating in a new product service system. For 
there to be a fuller understanding of the scope and changes to CW if the 
CE is to become a domestic reality, there also needs to be explorations of 
how CW is coordinated across household activities, along with the 
temporal dimensions of such activities. We already know that the 
adoption of one form of domestic practice can have (sometimes unde-
sirable) knock-on effects on others e.g. more domestic recycling often 
leads to less CW in other waste prevention behaviours in a household (e. 
g. Cox et al., 2010 ). Yet, we do not currently know how potential con-
flicts between competing CE solutions play out. Nor, how any conflicts 
are, or are not, resolved amongst householders. Is there a ceiling to 
consumers ’ participation in the CE? And if so, what combinations of CE 
practices are tenable for what types of households? And what forms of supporting infrastructures are required to foster yet more engagement, 
to the point where household emissions are brought down to the levels 
recommended by the Committee on Climate Change (ibid.)? 
A key factor in addressing these questions are issues of divisions of 
labour. This is an area rarely included in discussions of the CE but one 
that the concept of CW is especially attuned to. Research on household 
CW does show that there is an unequal distribution of labour, especially 
in terms of the gendered division of domestic labour (e.g. see Glucks -
mann, 2016 on recycling). However, there exists little knowledge about 
if, and how, CE CW differs from established arrangements in terms of 
domestic division of labour. In this respect, comparative research could 
provide valuable insights. Such research could take account both the 
gendered division of labour within CE CW activities, and how other 
socio-demographic factors such as household make-up, class, employ -
ment type/patterns, race and ethnicity all influence the uptake and 
engagement of CE CW. In short, who is doing the CW; why; and; to what 
affect? 
Finally, there are questions of where and how to do CW research. For 
one, there currently exists a limited range of extant and easily visible 
form of consumption-based CE practice, which would allow researchers 
to trace the requirements they make of consumers and their impacts. In 
particular, while the uptake of singular CE activities is reasonably well- 
documented (e.g. numbers joining car sharing schemes), less is known 
about how many households are undertaking multiple forms of CE 
practice, which would enable questions of coordination to be addressed. 
Furthermore, there is the methodological challenge of how to conduct 
research on CW that forms part of private, domestic realms, that is often 
habitual and conditioned by unarticulated norms (e.g. see Wonneck and 
Hobson, 2017 ). Methodologically, such research has precedents in 
‘practice theory ’ research (Halkier et al., 2011 ; Warde et al., 2017 ), 
which often deploys detailed qualitative, in situ approaches, utilising 
small n samples to understand in detail the rationales and outcomes of 
particular consumption practices (e.g. Gram-Hanssen, 2010 ). While 
much of this work is descriptive of current practices, research into CE 
CW would need to adopt a more action-research ethos (e.g. see Doyle 
and Davies, 2013 ), wherein research happens alongside householders 
experimenting in consciously changing their practices e.g. recruiting a 
small sample of households to live like ‘circular citizens ’ for several 
months (see Davies and Doyle, 2015 ). 
Finally, research into CE CW needs to move beyond the domestic 
sphere and space of the household, to consider engagement with 
consumption-based practices in other spaces. This could be individuals 
coming together once a month to participate in a local Repair Caf˘e, or 
household engagements with community-based CE business models, 
whether they are explicitly labelled as such. This is because some 
consumer-based CE practices are not bound to the home, but are rather 
implicated in establishing new patterns of, for example, mobility prac-
tices: practices, which in turn, influence CE CW household dynamics. 
5.Concluding comments 
In reviewing the literature relevant to CE CW, two key findings stand 
out. First, CE CW has so far not been studied systematically beyond 
Wheeler and Glucksmann ’s research into recycling. Extant knowledge of 
CE CW is therefore limited, fragmentary, and scattered throughout 
studies framed through concepts such as ‘domestic labour ’ and ‘co-cre -
ation ’, and looser terms such as ‘convenience ’ and ‘effort ’. Furthermore, 
there are considerable gaps in CE literature, especially in relation to CW 
involved in co-ownership, pooling, repeat exchanges, and avoidance of 
packaging. Second, it is clear that forms of provisioning associated with 
CE, including those most strongly associated with convenience, involve 
significant CW. As noted, prevailing models of CE require the reconfi -
guration of existing modes of CW (e.g. increased domestic recycling 
activities) and/or the establishment of new forms of CW (e.g. repairing, 
sharing): all of which are assumed, in the long-run, to make life easier or 
at least more pleasant and socially connected for the consumer —an K. Hobson et al.