y concept –that is, to collect waste in a pre-set geographic
area at a pre-set time –it lacks the ﬂexibility to deposit and clear the
waste on time. Meanwhile, the collectors ’capacity remains
underutilised or, at other times, insuf ﬁcient to meet the actual HWSS
requirement in the clearance cycle. Since the amount of waste pro-
duced is signi ﬁcantly affected by many factors such as seasons,
weather, festivals, parties, holidays etc., the traditional system suf-
fers from low ef ﬁciency, poor performance, delayed operation, and/
or under-optimisation. To arti ﬁcially maintain the HWSS account-
ability levels, the collectors ’bins in some communities are even
locked when administrative supervision is not available.
The IoT-enabled HWSS system, however, has been designed to
have the dynamic ability to detect the real-time ﬁll level informa-
tion of rubbish bins and to notify the backend waste management
company to clear the bins in time. The backend operations can also
analyse each collector ’s information and optimise the collection
and transport capacity in the whole area. With the real-time data
and monitoring mechanism provided by the IoT systems, the col-
lectors have no excuse of not achieving a high level of ﬂexibility and
efﬁciency in their waste collection operations. According to
accountability theory, such visibility in the operations enhances theexpectation of evaluation which, in turn, increases the collectors ’
accountability ( Boos et al., 2013 ). Therefore, the following propo-
sition is proposed:
P3. IoT systems can augment the collectors ’accountability in
HWSS by providing real-time visibility in their operations.
The accountability of the residents and the accountability of the
collectors interact with each other. Firstly, the residents ’account-
ability is the prerequisite for the collectors to achieve their
accountability. If the residents do not feel accountable in correctly
sorting their waste, the collectors will not be able to realise their
accountability, regardless of how advanced and smart the systems
are. Indeed, there have been cases of residents whose lack of
accountability have directly impacted on the collectors ’account-
ability. For example, many rubbish bins are burnt in China each year
due to irresponsible disposals of cigarette butts.
1The collectors,
however, can also be regarded as a type of external source of
accountability for the residents ( Ferris et al., 1995 ). The account-
ability of the collectors is the necessary condition for the residents
to achieve their accountability as it prompts residents to feel
comfortable and con ﬁdent that they can control the waste disposal
results ( Dose and Klimoski, 1995 ) given an increase in the expec-
tation of evaluation and social presence to satisfy their demands of
accountability ( Boos et al., 2013 ).
The success of HWSS systems relies on the positive interactions
between residents and collectors and their respective account-
abilities. While traditional systems fail to achieve this interaction
because of their limitations in system design, IoT HWSS systems are
able to promote the interaction based on their inherent smart
systems. When residents discard the waste into collectors ’bins, IoT
HWSS systems can detect the accuracy of the sorting from the
residents. IoT HWSS systems can also measure the real-time situ-
ation of the ﬁll rate of collectors ’bins; that is, when the “bins full ”
warning is triggered and sent to the control centre, the centre will
assign the waste clearing team to empty the bins in a timely
manner. Thus, residents can dispose of their waste without anylimitations related to time of disposal or bins ’capacity. In fact, the
less internal accountability is present in the residents, the greater
the need to use external accountability, which can be effectively
enabled by IoT. Based on the above discussion, the following
proposition is proposed:P4. IoT systems can lead to positive interactions between the
residents ’accountability and the collectors ’accountability.
Nearly all the residents understand the importance and signif-
icance of HWSS to the environment, but this does not necessarily
translate to their correct separation and disposal of waste since
good intentions may be forgotten ( Verplanken and Faes, 1999 ).
Since habits are forms of goal-directed automatic behaviour ( Aarts
and Dijksterhuis, 2000 ), the waste disposal habits of residents can
be changed to achieve certain goals. Behaviour is the reaction of
stimulation from the external environment ( Weiner, 2010 ;Gneezy
et al., 2011 ). If the result from the incentive is bene ﬁcial to oneself,
the behaviour will be strengthened and repeated; if not, the
behaviour will fail to be sustained. Although punishment can pre-
vent the enactment of undesirable behaviours, it cannot encourage
desired behaviours and can instil resistance and boredom in the
punished ( Trevino, 1992 ). Rewards, however, can increase one ’s
intrinsic motivation and sense of self-determination, depending on
what is required of one to perform ( Eisenberger et al., 1999 ).
Reward and punishment incentives, however, can only work
when there is support from all stakeholders, in this case, the gov-
ernment, local council bodies, the community, and the residentialcommittee. This is because reward incentives need strong ﬁnancial
support from the government. For example, Shenzhen spends more
than 60 million RMB in rewards each year.
2Equally, punishment
mechanisms can only work when the system is supervised and
implemented by all the stakeholders involved.
Reward and punishment incentives are less effective if they
operate in isolation –a successful system normally involves both
dimensions to simultaneously reward appropriate and punish
inappropriate behaviour ( Litzky et al., 2006 ). If the lens of
accountability theory is applied here, the moulding of desired be-
haviours by residents can be explained in the following way: pos-
itive and negative incentives instil recognition in residents that
their disposal behaviour has consequences ( Williams et al., 1981 );
residents ’expectations of having their disposal behaviour contin-
ually evaluated are raised and normalised ( Lerner and Tetlock,
1999 ); and ﬁnally, the desired behaviour is reinforced through
the perceived social presence of others ( Bond and Titus, 1983 ).
Indeed, the four cases (A-D) examined in this study proves that a
combination of reward and punishment systems in IoT-enabled
accountability is more effective for motivating the public to
participate in source separation of household waste, and to form
correct behaviour, especially in the early stages. One testimony is as
follows:
“The close combination of the rules and reward incentives is a
highlight of our waste sorting work in Luohu District, and it is
also a magic weapon for us to achieve the goal of waste sorting
work. ”
Wenzhi Lin (Deputy Director of Luohu District Urban Manage-
ment Bureau, Case D).
Once residents acquire the desired behaviour of correctly sort-
ing waste, incentives may play a less signi ﬁcant role but can still
reinforce the desired behaviour. Therefore, the following proposi-
tion is advanced:
P5.IoT-enabled accountability can be most effective by applying
both positive and negative incentives in the early stage imple-
mentation. Incentives, however, may be gradually phased out once
residents have formed the habit of sorting rubbish.
The accountability of the residents, however, may weaken if
1http://news.stcn.com/2019/1109/15486935.shtml (9 Nov 2019, Reporter: Yahua
Sun).2http://news.stcn.com/2019/1109/15486935.shtml (9 Nov 2019, Reporter: Yahua
Sun).B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300 (2021) 126773
8