f Hazardous Materials 422 (2022) 126724
3program, the Environmental Partnership Program for Accession was 
funded by the European Union for a duration of three years (2019 –2022) 
to support the development in environmental governance in the Western 
Balkans and Turkey (EU, 2020 ). These initiatives are followed by laws, 
policies, strategies, action plans, guidelines, and steering committees at 
the national level in each country and are considered and followed by 
local communities, including zero-waste NGOs, business sectors, local 
scientific communities, and other local stakeholders. 
The status of HCW management systems in most Western Pacific 
Region and South-East Asia Region countries is presented in the WHO 
reports (WHO, 2017, 2015b ). Despite some good practices outlined in 
these reports, compliance with HCW management remains a significant 
challenge in many countries. For instance, some developing countries 
use open burning and incinerating in single-chamber incinerators as the 
major means of treating waste (Khan et al., 2019; WHO, 2017 ). 
Furthermore, in low- to middle-income countries, HCW is mixed with 
general domestic waste and disposed of in municipal waste facilities or 
dumped illegally as the main disposal route in these countries (Bald˘e 
et al., 2017; UN, 2011 ). Consequently, a proper approach for HCW 
management seems to be vital to be adopted in these countries and 
continued or improved in countries already considering them. 
The CE has been introduced in the literature as a potential approach 
to reduce the negative environmental impacts of the HCW (Kane et al., 
2018; van Straten et al., 2021 ). The CE approach refers to a regenerative 
system in which, through slowing, closing, and narrowing supply chain 
loops, material input, waste, and emissions are minimized (Geissdoerfer 
et al., 2017 ). Accordingly, the design framework for the CE is increas -
ingly used in industry to build up product circularity in terms of its 
multiple-use and recycling (Linder et al., 2020; Shevchenko et al., 2021 ) 
and product sustainability in terms of minimizing its negative impact on 
the environment (Dyllick and Rost, 2017 ). Some limited CE practices 
already exist within the HCW management system in various forms and 
maturity levels (Kane et al., 2018 ). For instance, the CE approach has 
been highlighted in the literature as a means of reducing HCW through 
reusing and recycling durable medical equipment (Ordway et al., 2020 ), repairing and recycling hospital instruments and surgical stainless steel 
wastes (van Straten et al., 2021 ), and replacing disposable products with 
reusable ones in medical and dental sectors (Antoniadou et al., 2021 ). 
Besides, recovering value from disposables, such as using medical nee-
dles in concrete production, has also been stressed in the existing studies 
(Hamada and Ismail, 2021 ). However, there is a lack of decent academic 
discussion regarding the application of CE principles and practices to 
increase resource efficiency in the healthcare industry and reduce the 
adverse environmental effects of both hazardous and non-hazardous 
HCW. 
3.Research design 
The present research followed a mixed-method approach adopted 
from Ranjbari et al. (2021b) by employing an analytical method to map 
the scientific literature of HCW, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The rationales 
behind adopting this mixed-method approach are (1) unfolding the 
theoretical foundations and developments of HCW research by con-
ducting an analysis based on a massive database and (2) taking advan -
tage of the ability of bibliometric and text mining analyses to identify 
established past evolutions and emerging topical areas (Ertz and 
Leblanc-Proulx, 2018 ) within a huge amount of publications in the 
literature in a reasonable manner. Data collection and the process of 
analyzing the data are explained in the following sections. 
3.1. Data collection and preparation 
The Web of Science (WoS) database, as one of the most trusted 
publisher-independent global citation databases in academia, was 
selected for collecting data herein. A combination of different keywords 
directly addressing the scope of our study was extracted from literature 
and elaborated to design the following search string: "healthcare waste" 
OR "medical waste" OR "hospital waste" OR "clinical waste" OR "infec -
tious waste" OR "sharps waste" OR "pathological waste" OR "pharma -
ceutical waste" OR "biomedical waste" (search in the title of articles) 
Fig. 1.Various levels of healthcare waste (HCW) governance with a focus on European Union countries.  M. Ranjbari et al.