of Material Culture 00(0)
highlights the methodology of ‘trash-tracing’ as well as interview and observation data. 
After this review, material and cultural transformations of the food waste are analysed in three parts: refining leftovers, a feeling for the slurry and making biogas. In the con-
cluding discussion, we further argue for the relevance of our make-up work approach: how the potential inflows and leaks challenge the neatness of the CE of food waste and, thus, that the micro-management of preventing interruptions is crucial.
Food waste in the circular economy
Waste as a social and material object becomes de-valued and re-valued through cultural and institutional processes (Douglas, 1966; Reno, 2009). Such processes concern, for example, how waste is sorted and classified as a resource vs ‘still rubbish’ (e.g. Lucas, 2002; Roshizawa and Hird, 2019). Food waste has always been a matter of societal concern due to its symbolic relation to dirt and disgust. However, it has also served as fertilizer and compost soil, and more recently as a substantial basis for the production of biogas. Organic household waste does indeed have a history that illustrates its ontological contingency, not least because it is materially plastic. This tension between cultural de-valuing (construction of ‘waste’) and economic re-valuing (‘waste as resource’) makes it methodologically advantageous to study as waste flows, in which social relations, materials, values, agencies, bodies and knowledge are linked together against the backdrop of political frameworks, municipal responsibilities, national law and international policy regulation (see Hird, 2012). Thus, waste is not passively signified. It transforms and is transformed by the very networks in which it is produced (Roshizawa and Hird, 2019).
In her analysis of how waste unfolds as social relations and materializations at vari-
ous scales in different contexts, Gille (2010) offers the notion of a ‘waste regime’. She states that social institutions determine what waste is considered valuable in a society and can be studied at both the macro- and micro-levels, or rather how they interplay: ‘the concept of waste regime extends attention to the very production of waste and allows us to understand the economic, social, and cultural origins of specific wastes as well as the logic of their generation’ (p. 1056). Using Gille’s concept of waste regimes, we approach contemporary Swedish politics, practices and materializations of trans-forming household food leftovers into valuable commodities, i.e. the non-fossil fuel of biogas and bio-fertilizer.
As mentioned above, Sweden has for decades aimed to become a ‘green superpower’ 
(Ideland, 2018). In line with this national branding and building on, for example, an extensive (social, moral, legal and material) system for recycling and decreasing pollu-tion, the government communicated a national strategy for CE (Regeringskansliet, 2020). The aim is to make Sweden the first fossil-free country in the world through shift-ing patterns of production, consumption and recycling. The public sector, the industry and the civil society are key actors in the striving for a better world. Political will, mate-rial conditions and cultural norms are assembled to transform waste into something desirable and valuable. However, studies on how the CE is understood and played out address the tension between the political will to uphold an idea of circularity and the impossibility of doing so in practice (Winans et al., 2017; for Swedish cases see, e.g., Corvellec, 2016; Rosenlund, 2017).