tion towards solving global problems together (Ngan
et al. 2019 ). Co-production, therefore, is a paradigm shift from
the traditional model of public policymaking and service de-livery that advocates for the involvement and participation of
end-users of services as co-partaker in the process. This new
public governance model recognizes variants of collaborativearrangements as viable governance options at different levels
(Howlett and Ramesh 2017 ). In high-income societies, the
inclusion within the governing processes of the plurality ofactors has gained wider acceptability and is increasingly being
regarded as a proactive way of addressing complex societal
problems (Clarence 2002 ;S o r r e n t i n oe ta l . 2016 ). But it is also
recognized that in the low- and middle-income countries,
where resources are usually limited due to incomplete devel-
opment, that co-production is practically inevitable in publicservice delivery (Linders 2012 ).
In recent times, few research works have been carried
out on the adoption and implementation of co-productionas a public policy delivery method at the developing lo-
cations of the globe (Lu and Sidortsov 2019 ;M a n g a ia n d
De Vries 2018 ; Mukherjee and Mukherjee 2017 ;
Gutberlet 2015 ). But most of these works are largely
conducted outside Africa explicating the other global
south experience especially in waste management
(Gutberlet 2015 ;L ua n dS i d o r t s o v 2019 ). The heteroge-
neous characterizing features of cities and societies alongglobal regional lines in terms of social, political, econom-
ic, demographic, and even cultural peculiarities make it
unavoidably necessary to study other regional and coun-tries’experiences towards contributing to the global dis-
course of co-production in waste management. Nigeria
being the most populous nation and the highest producerof urban solid waste in Africa is more appropriately sit-
uated to be studied as a case study. The current work
will, therefore, provide a departure point for understand-ing co-production in solid waste management in Africa ’s
context. Moreover, the previous works on co-production
in waste management had dwelled more on fewer com-ponents of waste management systems. For instance,
waste sorting (Lu and Sidortsov 2019 ;D iL i d d oa n d
Vinella 2020 ); waste reduction and sorting (Mclaren and
Agyeman 2015 ); waste collection (Landi and Russo
2020 ); and informal recycling (Failor 2010 ;G u t b e r l e t
2015 ). The current work discussed more components
such as waste conversion, waste transportation, e-waste
management, recycling, informal recycling, and resource
recovery.
The paper is structured as follows: the introduction de-
scribes the background of the research study; the next section
is a brief literature overview and conceptual framework;Section “Methodology ”explains the study methodology; the
results and findings are discussed in the section “Research
findings and discussion. ”The final section is the conclusion.Literature/conceptual framework
Waste management status in Nigeria: brief overview
With a population currently estimated at 198 million people in
2019, Nigeria is struggling with enormous socio-economicchallenges which have been predicted to persist into the future
due to (i) unmitigated growth in both general and urban pop-
ulation and (ii) lack of attendant growth in the country ’sc r i t -
ical capacities such as state-of-the-art urban infrastructure, ad-
vancement in technology and economic resources (Ezeudu
2020 ;E z e u d ue ta l . 2020 ). Thus, the continuous population
growth results in the proliferation of both urban and urbaniz-
ing areas and the resultant rise in the quantities of solid waste
generated by communities (Ezeudu et al. 2019 ). The quantity
of waste generated by 106 million people currently living in
Nigeria ’s cities is about 67,000 tonnes per day (TPD), and this
value is projected to exceed 125,000 TPD by 2040 (Ezeuduet al. 2021 ). Unfortunately, both in the past and the present,
Nigeria ’s waste management procedures, policies, and insti-
tutional arrangement has followed a top-down structural ap-proach where qualitative laws are made with little or no con-
siderations to the input of the non-state actors in the
policymaking and service delivery cycle of commissioning,
design, delivery, or assessment (Agunwamba 1998 ;E z e u d u
et al. 2020 ). This has led to undesired waste management
outcomes in the form of poor waste collection services, inef-
ficient recycling, and resource recovery schemes, and abysmal
waste disposal methods which have characterized manyNigerian cities (Ogwueleka 2009 ;N n a j i 2015 ). The current
status of waste management in Nigeria is also characterized
by the absence of waste management data, absence of wastesorting schemes, lack of conceptual planning for waste mini-
mization, inadequate financing mechanism, and poor waste
management policy regimes (Ezeudu et al. 2020 ). Detailed
discussion on the past and current waste management prac-
tices in Nigeria can be found in Ezeudu et al. ( 2020 ).
Meanwhile, today ’s conceptualization of sustainable waste
management operations has gone beyond adequate waste col-
lection and efficient disposal, to include business and econom-
ic possibilities towards achieving a circular economy
(Centobelli et al. 2020 ). The heightening awareness that the
global resources are finite in availability has triggered a grow-
ing focus by businesses exploring better resources and processefficiency at different stages of production and consumption
to promote the principles of circular economy (Patwa et al.
2021 ). Circular economy principles promote waste reduction,
waste reuse, eliminating waste and pollution, optimal use of
products, and regeneration of natural resources
(EllenMacArthurFoundation 2021 ). Previous works on the
circular economy in solid waste management in Nigeria has
identified the key enablers to circular economy adoption as the
presence of informal waste recycling activities, the existenceEnviron Sci Pollut Res