There have been numerous successful cases of waste reconversion as demonstrated in the 
literature review. However, the case of Cotonou prov ides a new landscape that has been rarely covered 
in the literature. The proposed model offers the possibility of creating a closed loop economy where waste can be used as an asset rather than being seen  as a hindrance to local municipal budg ets. Because 
there is a lack of financial resources in most sub-Sa haran nations, the issue of waste is rarely addressed 
as part of a larger budget. In Benin, it was observed that linear thinking would eventually lead to a leakage of municipal budget, to solve and address waste issues, but that there was still a need to relocate 
slums. However, no funds were allocated for the relo cation of slum dwellers, nor for the construction 
of alternative housing for these people. The proposed model thus looks at responding to the challenges 
faced in Benin by initially using the funds for waste management to solve the issue of waste, but at the same time providing housing units as a by-product. The model’s key dimensions are also seen as necessitating the need to evolve through the soci o-technical transition theory. Adoption of this 
approach is the key to ensuring that the concept transcends the numerous levels of society, thus 
Figure 5. Proposed model for conversion of waste into housing units.
6. Discussion
There have been numerous successful cases of waste reconversion as demonstrated in the literature
review. However, the case of Cotonou provides a new landscape that has been rarely covered in the
literature. The proposed model offers the possibility of creating a closed loop economy where waste
can be used as an asset rather than being seen as a hindrance to local municipal budgets. Because there
is a lack of ﬁnancial resources in most sub-Saharan nations, the issue of waste is rarely addressed
as part of a larger budget. In Benin, it was observed that linear thinking would eventually lead to
a leakage of municipal budget, to solve and address waste issues, but that there was still a need to
relocate slums. However, no funds were allocated for the relocation of slum dwellers, nor for the
construction of alternative housing for these people. The proposed model thus looks at responding to
the challenges faced in Benin by initially using the funds for waste management to solve the issue of
waste, but at the same time providing housing units as a by-product. The model’s key dimensions are
also seen as necessitating the need to evolve through the socio-technical transition theory. Adoption of
this approach is the key to ensuring that the concept transcends the numerous levels of society, thus
ensuring the adoption of a resilient sustainable implementation schedule upon the social fabric of
the city.