Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Ecological Economics journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolecon Analysis Consumers in a Circular Economy: Economic Analysis of Household Waste Sorting Behaviour Doan Nainggolana,⁎, Anders Branth Pedersena, Sinne Smedb, Kahsay Haile Zemoa, Berit Haslera, Mette Termansenb aDepartment ofEnvironmental Science, AarhusUniversity, Frederiksborgvej 399, DK 4000 Roskilde, Denmark bDepartment ofFood and Resource Economics, CopenhagenUniversity, Rolighedsvej 23, DK-1958 Frederiksberg C., Denmark ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Circular economy Waste sorting Recycling Discrete choice experimentChoice model Household preference Survey Segmentation Latent class modelABSTRACT Thepresentresearchprovidesaquantitativeassessmentofhouseholds'preferencesfordifferentwasteseparation andhandlingschemes.Weemployachoice-experimentbased,nation-widesurveyacrossDenmark.Thefindingssupport four different types of “waste sorters”; reflecting the heterogeneity in household waste sorting pre- ferences. To illustrate, while one segment responds favourably towards sorting systems with the possibility for localcollectionpointsforhazardouswasteandforsortingbio-waste,somesegmentsexpressoppositeresponses.We found statistically significant relationships between the heterogeneity in household preferences for home wastesortingandhouseholds'sociodemographiccharacteristics,currentself-reportedtimeallocationfor waste sorting and handling, use of recycling facilities as well as attitudinal factors on personal motivation and socialinfluence. Furthermore, the findings reveal trade-offs between households' waste sorting preferences and theamount of time they have to spend sorting. We estimate a value of time for this pro-environmental activity of between2.8and6.3EURperhour.Overall,thepresentresearchdemonstratesthathouseholdsexpressdifferent preferences towards the practical design of waste sorting systems. This needs to be considered in the develop-mentofpolicyinitiativesinordertoachievemoreeffectivesortingsystemsthroughhigherratesofcompliance from the public at large. 1. Introduction The concept of a circular economy has garnered international at- tention over the last decade. For instance, developing a circular economyhasbecomeafocalpointfortheUnitedNationsandisseenas vital for progress towards achieving several of the UN Sustainable Development Goals . The European Union is among the global frontrunners in policy developmentinthefield–e.g.byintroducingtheconceptofthewaste hierarchyinthe2008EUWasteFrameworkDirective(Directive2008/ 98/EC, 2008) and most recently by approval of new ambitious mea- sures for developing a circular economy by the EU Member States inMay2018.AccordingtotheEU,‘thenewlegislationrepresentsthemost modern waste legislation in the world’ . Amongtheaimsareambitioustargetsforrecyclingofmunicipalwaste  and new recycling targets for packagingwaste fractions 1ranging from 30%  to 85% . Aprerequisiteforincreasingthecircularityofresourceflowsinthe economy is that waste is maintained in separate resource types. It is therefore important to analyse the implementation, effectiveness and cost of different waste handling and separation mechanisms. Despite thegrowinginterestinthesubject,mostoftheresearcheffortstodate havetakenatechnicalsystemperspectiveusingtoolssuchaslifecycle analysis of waste resources in circular economy (e.g. Mik et al., 2016; Scheepens et al., 2016; Huysman et al., 2017). In general, studies into consumers' propensity to take part in the realization of circular economy are still lacking . In the present research, we investigate the factors shaping the propensity to engage in household sorting. We hypothesise that they will influence the likelihood of voluntary compliance with the rules of particular sorting and hence the effectiveness of the system. Based on previousstudiesweidentifyfivefactorsthatappeartobeimportantfor https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.106402 Received 25 February 2019; Received in revised form 14 July 2019; Accepted 16 July 2019⁎Corresponding author. E-mail address: dna@envs.au.dk . 1Wastefractionsrefertothedifferentcategoriesofwasteaccordingtotheirrespectiveproperties.Theclassificationisparticularlyrelevantinthecontextofsorting as different waste fractions require different ways of handling or treatment. Examples of waste fractions include paper, cardboard, plastics, electronics, batteries, organic or bio-waste, etc.Ecological E conomics 166  106402 Available online 28 August 2019 0921-8009/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. T theextenttowhichindividualsobject/agreetocomplywithbehaviours expectedinparticularsortingschemes.Theidentifiedfactorsare1)the extenttowhichtherespondentbelievesthattheschemeismeaningful, i.e. reduce important negative environmental impacts; 2) theextent to which the respondent believes that the recycling is effective, i.e. that therecycledmaterialwillre-enterintonewproductcycles;3)theeffort requiredtosort;4)anyadditionalnuisanceofusingthevarioussorting schemes; 5) the importance of existing facilities and other factors in- cluding habits, self-image and social influence for the motivations to sort. To better understand the relative strengths of these factors we specify a model to characterize the attractiveness of different sorting schemes to the household. We adopt a discrete choice experiment  method to investigate the trade-offs households make between variouscharacteristicsofdifferentwastesortingschemes.DCEisawell suited method for eliciting preferences for outcomes which can be de- scribed by a set of attributes. The method has been widely used in differentfields,however,tothebestofourknowledge,itsapplications for quantifying household preferences for waste sorting schemes are still limited (except a few examples: Karousakis and Birol, 2008; Czajkowski et al., 2014, 2017; Lee et al., 2017). This paper makes a contribution to the field in a number of ways. Firstly, in previous environmental economic studies investigatinghousehold preferences for waste separation, the waste sorting system has been largely described by the number of fractions to sort, for ex- ample 1 fraction , 2 fractions, 4 fractions, and so on . In the present paper, we investigate how households' preferences for waste sorting schemes may differ ac-cording to the specific waste categories. Household waste consists of many different waste types and the environmental externalities and scope for resource re-utilisation varies significantly across categories. Focusing only on the number of sorting fractions is insufficient for environmental economic evaluation of alternative sorting systems. In thispaper,weincludeattributestoexplicitlyindicatethetypesofwasteto sort: Hazardous waste , plastics,andbio-wastetoreflectthediversityofthewaste.Sortingbio- waste is a relevant case as bio-waste makes up the large share of the total household waste quantity . Moreover, the sorting of bio-waste might exert inconvenience to households due tohygiene and unpleasant odours especially during hot summer seasons . The degree of inconvenience can be an im- portant factor reducing households' waste sorting and has been esti- mated in monetary terms – the so-called inconvenience cost – using DCE . Batteries, other hazardous waste and plastics present important environmental risk as these are among waste frac- tions with high content of hazardous chemical substances including mercury , lead , and cadmium  . Fur- thermore, while recycling of plastics is currently increasing, the en- vironmental and economic rationales are being debated (Craighill and Powell, 1996; Gradus et al., 2017). Secondly, in the existing economic literature, time has been sug- gested as a relevant variable in explaining households' waste sorting behaviour . However, the explicit treatment of time in the designs of previousstudieshasbeenlimited.Thedesignoftheresearch forthepresentpapermakesitpossibletomakeanexplicitassessmentof the cost of time incurred by households, which can potentially be in- cluded in cost-benefit analyses of alternative household waste sorting systems. Thirdly, while previous studies are largely more local in the coverage , the analysis for the present paper draws from a Danish nation-wide survey with a large sample size . As such, the present study encompasses the variation in preferences among households representing the nationalsocio-demographic spread and existing variation in household waste recycling schemes. From the identification of household preferences, wedevelopatypologyofwastesorterswhichreflecttheheterogeneity of household preferences towards home sorting alternatives. This haspotential relevance for the development of more flexible policy inter- ventionsforsupportingmoreeffectivehomewasteseparationschemes. Theoverarchinggoalofthepresentresearchisthereforetoquantify the scope for further decentralized waste sorting by assessing to what extent households are likely to opt for particular waste separation schemes and by investigating to what extent the designs of waste se- paration options shape households' willingness to engage in sorting activities. Thepaperisstructuredasfollows. Section2providesanoverviewof previousstudiesonhouseholdpreferencesforparticipatingindifferent waste management programs. Section 3describes the modelling ap- proach and data collection process. Section 4presents the findings of the research and section 5discusses these in light of existing body of literature.Section 6provides concluding remarks and policy insights. 2. Overview of existing economic literature on household wastesorting behaviour Studies on household preferences for waste handling schemes to date have been approached using different scenarios. For example,using contingent valuation survey in Finland, Huhtala  in- vestigatedhouseholdpreferencesovertwodifferentwastemanagement systems:recyclingversusincineration.Accordingtohercalculation,an ‘average resident’ would have much higher probability  for choosingrecyclingoverincineration.Huhtala'sfindingspointto income as an important determinant of the household preferences where high income households tend to express higher willingness to pay for incineration than recycling. Huhtala's interpretation of the finding is that recycling demands more effort and time and that op- portunitycostoftimeishigherforhouseholdswithhigherincomethan those with lower income. Furthermore, under the assumption that a householdspendsbetween15and45minperweekrecycling,andthat the use of spare time has a value of half the wage rate, Huhtala esti- matesthe‘timecost’associatedwithrecyclingtobewithintherangeof FIM 27–82  per hour, in 1999. Another example, a study by Lee et al. , used a choice ex- periment to investigate people's preferences for and the inconvenience costofwastesortingalternativesinSouthKorea.MorespecificallyLee et al. investigated to what extent waste sorting preferences are influ- enced by, among other things, the availability of an automatic sorting system inacentralfacility, theoptionofaprivatecompanyvisitingandcollectingwastefromeach individual household, and the hygiene level of the spot where house- holds otherwise have to drop off their waste. Lee et al. found hetero- geneity in the waste sorting preferences and the associated incon- venience costs. To illustrate this, even though an automated sortingsystemwouldrequirelesseffort,somepeoplestill prefer to do the sorting themselves . Moreover, the study showsthatyoungerpeopleexpresshigherinconveniencecostcompared with the older people. Kipperberg and Larson  employed a contingent rating ex- periment, and evaluated household preferences over five community recycling programs reflecting anticipated policy changes in the com- munity recycling system in Seattle. Variation in the five programs was characterized by differences in the expected overall recycling rate and the estimated cost that each household has to bear per month. They reported variations in individual preferences and over the recycling programs. Their analysis also showed socioeconomic and attitude fac- tors as determinants of the heterogeneity in respondents' preferences across different community recycling programs. For example, their findings showed that introducing a food waste recycling program was not particularly appealing to older respondents and male respondents while a positive preference was observed for respondents with higher educationallevel.Whilethefindingsof Huhtala clearlyshowed income as an important explanatory factor for household waste re-cycling preferences, the findings of Kipperberg and Larson D. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 2 suggestthattherelationbetweenincomeandhouseholdpreferencesfor recyclingactivitiesisnotthatstraightforward.KipperbergandLarson's study found household income only marginally significant for one specificprogramnamelytheprohibitionofmixingrecyclableitemsinto general waste. A study from the UK showed statistically insignificant relationship between recycling rate and income . Someotherstudiesinvestigatedtowhatextenthouseholdspreferto sort waste at home as opposed to the alternative of leaving the waste sorting to be professionally handled by another party for example at a centralfacility.Differencesinthefindingsfromthesestudiesareworth noting.Forexample,inastudyby BartelingsandSterner,1999,57%of the respondents would consider the possibility of not having to do thesorting themselves, however, only 40% of this group (i.e. 23% of the total respondents) expressed positive willingness to pay for such a service. The study reported an average WTP of 420 SEK , a figure which is about five times lower than the estimated value of sorting effort of 2500 SEK  which is based on the average numberofhoursspentonsortingandtheaverageincomeperhourafter tax.Anotherexample,inastudyfromNorwayby Bruvolletal., 72% of the respondents would rather have the sorting conducted by a recyclingcompany,albeitunderthepremisethattheprovisionofsuch a service does not lead to additional expenses on the respondents. On the contrary, choice experiment based studies by Czajkowski et al.  reported that on average their respondents prefer to sort waste at home even if doing so incurs cost (including efforts and time) to the respondents. To illustrate, 70% of their re- spondents display a positive preference for sorting their household waste into five categories compared to not doing any sorting. Previousresearchhasshownthathouseholdchoicestotakepartin more demanding waste handling schemes, such as recycling, can be explained by a multitude of factors. Household participation is influ- encedbythesocalled“inconveniencefactor”becausehouseholdshave to make effort, to allocate space, and to give up time to undertake re-cycling activities (Huhtala, 2010; Sidique et al., 2010a; Czajkowski et al., 2017). These activities also incur extra household expenses e.g. due to the use of warm water for cleaning some of the materials (e.g. Bruvoll et al., 2000). The provision of waste collection set up and re- cyclinginfrastructure,whichcontributestolesseningtheinconvenience factor, has also been shown as an important determinant (Gilli et al., 2018). To illustrate, travel distance to a drop-off recycling site has negative effects on the rate of visits to the site . Studiesshowthathouseholdsdisplaygreaterrecyclingactivitiesunder thecurbsidecollectionsystemthanifthehouseholdsthemselveshave to transport the recyclable materials to a collection station (e.g. Hong et al., 1993; Caplan et al., 2002; Karousakis and Birol, 2008; Sidique et al., 2010b; Gilli et al., 2018). Existing studies also show that more frequent collection systems tend to be preferred by households . Furthermore, people express different preferences towards recycling programs de- pendingontheexpectedrecyclingrateandhowmuchitwouldcostthe households to participate in the programs (Kipperberg and Larson, 2012). Some studies indicate that higher fees for waste disposals and the implementation of variable pricing of waste disposal would give peopleincentivetorecyclemore(e.g. Hongetal.,1993; Sidiqueetal., 2010b).However,arecentstudyfromNorwaysuggeststhattheintroductionofeconomicincentives,throughaweight based fee on waste, trigger different responses. For some households, the scheme encourages them to sort more due to cost saving. In other words, these households respond positively to the external push broughtaboutbytheeconomicincentive.Meanwhile,theintroduction of economic incentive does not change the degree of sorting done by those households who are self-motivated; that they do not end up sorting more after the introduction of the scheme. Heller and Vatn argue that this illustrates that people motivated by environ- mental concerns may question the justification of an economic in- centivescheme,andasaresulttheschemecanbecounterproductive.Arecent study from Italy by Gilli et al.  shows that the efficacyof policies to promote recycling is very much dependent on individual motivations. Another line of research has uncovered the important role of per- sonal belief, moral aspects, social norms and social interactions. A re- cent study by Czajkowski et al. , based on a survey in a neigh- bourhood in Poland, revealed that the majority of the household respondentsprefertosortthemselvesprimarilybecausetheybelieveit wouldnotbedoneasthoroughlyatacentralfacility.Thishighlightsthe importanceoftrustinthesystem,andithasbeenevidencedthatreports aboutsortedwasteendingupinincinerationfacilitieshavereducedthe motivation to sort . Some studies have shown that the propensity to participate in recycling schemes iscloselyrelatedtothedegreetowhichindividualsperceiverecyclingas their moral obligation, that they are doing the right thing for the en- vironment, and that they hold a sense of personal responsibility for sorting (e.g. Bruvoll et al., 2000; Berglund, 2006; Nyborg et al., 2006; Brekkeetal.,2010; HellerandVatn,2017).Forsomeindividuals,doing so is part of maintaining their self-image (Nyborg et al., 2006; Brekke et al., 2010; Czajkowski et al., 2017). Previous research reveals that individuals' recycling behaviour is also influenced by views and beha- viours with regard to recycling of those within the individuals' com- munity or social network. Individuals are more likely to recycle when theirfamilyandfriendsalsosharetheideathatrecyclingisanactivity worth pursuing. In the same vein, individuals are more likely to put greatereffortsintorecyclingwhentheythinkthattheirneighboursand othersintheircommunityarealsodoingtheirshare.Theroleofsocial influence is particularly important to individuals when they are not certain about their personal recycling responsibility (Brekke et al., 2010). Finally, previous studies have reported a number of socio-eco- nomicdeterminantsofhouseholdwastehandlingbehavioursincluding age, income, household size, and employment (e.g. Hong et al., 1993; Huhtala, 2010; Sidique et al., 2010a, 2010b; Kipperberg and Larson, 2012;Lee et al., 2017). 3. Methods and data 3.1. Model specification We use a choice modelling approach to quantify the importance of different factors in household's preferences for different waste sorting schemes. This follows the same approach as other economic studies analysing household's waste sorting and recycling preferences (Kipperberg, 2007; Huhtala, 2010; Czajkowski et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2017). The approach follows the standard random utility framework, wheretheutilitythatrespondent ngainsfromwastesortingalternative jis specified as : = +V U . nj nj nj  Assuch,thefirstcomponent, Vnj,isthedeterministiccomponentof individual n's utility, captured through the attributes of the waste sortingandhandlingalternative j.Basedontheliterature,wedefine Vnj as a linear function of seven waste sorting attributes. The first three attributesconcernthetypeofwastetobeseparated,astherespondents may attach different level of importance to recycling waste with dif- ferent environmental impact profiles. Furthermore, different types of waste may also involve different levels of nuisance to the households. The three types of waste are hazardous waste, plastics and bio-waste. The fourth attribute reflects the effectiveness ofthe system in terms of reuse of the material, i.e. percentage of the material that will re-entertheeconomicsystemasnewproducts.Thefifthattributemeasuresthe effort  required by the household to sort, and the sixth and se- venthattributescapturethelevelofserviceandcostrespectively.These factors are measured as the frequency of waste collection and the an- nual fee for waste collection and handling . The second component, ε nj, is a random component of the utilityD. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 3 function. Assuming that this term is distributed independently and identically  across respondents and alternatives, it specifies the standard Conditional Logit Model  and the probability of re- spondent n choosing alternative jis: =e ePnj JX k JXj k  Inthisframework,weincludetheimportanceofcurrentsortingand recycling habits, internal motivation  and social influenceor interaction as factors potentially explaining the heterogeneity in preferences across households. These factors are captured by asking respondents to indicate the extent to which they agree or disagree to each of six statements: three statements related to internal motivation and the other three for capturing social influence (see the last six variables in Table 2). To quantify potential heterogeneity in re- spondents' preferences for waste sorting and handling alternatives, we estimate a Latent Class Model  (Boxall and Adamowicz, 2002; Greene and Hensher, 2003; Train, 2003). Following the LCM frame- work,thelatentheterogeneityofhouseholdwastesortingpreferencesiscaptured by assigning households into S number of segments. LCM therefore identifies individual segments  and the utility function for respondents in each segment can now be expressed as: = + X U . nj s snj nj s  Following this, the probability ofchoosing waste sorting jamongJ alternatives for respondent nbelonging to segment s) can be calculated : =e ePns jX k JXsj sk  Eachrespondent nhasaprobabilitytobelongtoanysegmenteven though the association of respondents to segments is not known. Theprobability of segment membership, P ns, is specified as constant prob- abilitiesthatsumtooneacrossthesegments, S.Theresultinglikelihood of respondent nchoosing a waste sorting and handling alternative j) is equal to the sum over all latent classes sof the class-specific membership model conditional on the product of class Pn|sand the probability of belonging to that class Pns: ==P P P n jsS ns ns j 1  We explore the association between class or segment membership and the respondents' socio-economic characteristics, current waste sorting and recycling habits and attitudes towards sorting in their community. We use a Latent Class framework following the argument previouslymadebyothers(see BoxallandAdamowicz,2002; Beharry- Borgetal.,2013),thattheLCMoffersrelevantandpracticalinsightsforpolicy developments on the heterogeneity of the target population. Continuous specification of the distribution of preferences, using a mixed logit specification, often reveals less insight for policy making. We use Nlogit version 5 to estimate the models . 3.2. Calculation of willingness to pay for different levels of recycling and inconvenience cost We calculate the household average willingness to pay for changes in scheme requirements for sorting of waste and other scheme attri-butes. As the coefficient, β k, for the sorting attribute kmeasures the change in the attractiveness of a scheme if sorting is required, thecoefficientforwastecollectionfee, β f,measurestheimportancethatthe householdsplaceonthefee.Therelativevalueofthecoefficients,(β k/ βf), therefore reflects the trade-off households are willing to make be- tween sorting of additional waste fractions and the collection fee.Assuming that collection fee has a negative impact on households, a positive coefficient on the sorting fraction would indicate that house- holdswouldbewillingtopayahighercollectionfeeforwasteschemes whereadditionalsortingwouldberequired.Inthesamewayanegative coefficient on a sorting fraction would indicate that households would not be willing to accept higher collection fees for schemes with re- quirements to sort. In this way, the relative values of the coefficients measurestherelativeimportanceofthedifferentattributesofthewasteTable 1 List of attributes for home waste sorting choices. Attributes Definition Levels Hazardous waste How households should handle hazardous waste 1. Households can dispose of this waste category in a special container that is installed locally <100m from their residence 2. Households must drive and drop off this waste category at a designated facility Plastics How households should handle plastic waste 1. Households are required to sort plastic waste 2. Households are NOT required to sort plastic waste Bio-waste How households should handle bio-waste 1. Households are required to sort bio-waste 2. Households are NOT required to sort bio-waste Recycling capacity Theproportionofthesortedwastethateventuallygetsrecycled.Thisreflectsthe capacity of the company/municipality that recycles sorted waste.1. 50%2. 60% 3. 70% 4. 75%5. 85% 6. 95% Time use The amount of time households are expected to spend weekly on sorting and handling waste. This includes time used for cleaning waste before putting the waste into the specified containers, time used for driving to designated waste collection facility etc.1. 10min per week 2. 15min per week 3. 25min per week 4. 30min per week 5. 50min per week 6. 60min per week Frequency of waste collectionThe frequency of waste collection by the municipality 1. Twice a week 2. Once a week 3. Fortnightly Waste collection and handling feeAnnual bill that households must pay to the municipality for waste collection and handling service1. 1500 DKK per year2. 2500 DKK per year3. 3000 DKK per year 4. 3700 DKK per year 5. 4000 DKK per year 6. 4500 DKK per yearD. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 4 sortingalternativesforthedifferentsegmentsasidentifiedthroughthe Latent Class Model . Using the same logic, we also derive the implied average value of time, an inconvenience cost, that households place on home waste se- paration. This implied value of time is equal to the ratio of the coeffi- cientfortimeattributeandtheprice(wastecollectionandhandlingfee attribute) coefficient from the choice model. 3.3. Characterizingwaste sorting segments Weuseprobitanalysistoexaminetowhatextentsociodemographic characteristics, respondents' current habits on sorting and recycling, internal  motivation as well as external  influence relate to the heterogeneity of household preferences for waste sorting alternatives . In the analysis, re- spondents'membershiptooneofthesegmentsasidentifiedthroughthe Latent Class Model serves as the dependent variables and household sociodemographic characteristics, recycling habits and personal and external influences as predictors. The respondents are assigned to the segment for which the membership probability is highest. For each segment,firstallpredictorswereincludedinthe model specification and then the best model was selected followingstepwise method in STATA . Significance level for removal of the variables from the model was set to 0.1. 3.4. Data collection We collected data through an online survey targeting households across Denmark. The first task in developing the DCE design was to identifyawiderangeoffactorsthatwouldberelevantforinclusionasattributes of different waste sorting schemes. The subsequent task was todefineappropriatelevelsforeachchosenattribute.Theinitiallistof relevant factors was collated based on a literature review. In the end, seven attributes were selected and included in the DCE . Inthequestionnaire,wetriedtoavoidbiasbycarefulconsideration oftheneutrality,ambiguityandcomplexityofthequestions(Choiand Pak, 2005). We aimed at having a reasonable amount of response ca- tegories in each section of the questionnaire to avoid ‘drop outs’ and tried to avoid yea- and nay-saying by having questions turned in dif- ferent directions. Questions were carefully phrased to aim at having themataneutralleveltoavoidpleasingeffectsetc.(see ChoiandPak, 2005). Ultimo November 2017 we invited 7 persons to test a draftquestionnaire, received comments, revised the questionnaire, and re- duced the length of the survey to avoid respondent fatigue (see Choi andPak,2005).Wethenconductedapilotsurveywith60respondents andprovidedspaceattheendofthequestionnairefortherespondents to provide comments. No concerns were raised to the questionnaire, and we were therefore assured that the content of the questionnaire including the choice experiment set-ups appeared realistic to the re- spondents. Inthechoiceexperiment,eachrespondentwaspresentedwitheight choice tasks. For each task a respondent was asked to choose one of threewastesortingandhandlingoptionsoranoneoptionwhichrefers to the option of not choosing any of the presented sorting scenarios. This none option alternative does not have attribute levels associated withitandisspecifiedonlyasthealternativespecificconstant.Several studies have adopted a similar approach (e.g. Christensen et al., 2011; Greiner, 2016; Rose and Hess, 2009). There were three questionnaire versions , each with 8 choicetasksandtherespondentswererandomlyassignedtooneoftheTable 2 List of variables included in the probit analysis. Variables Descriptions of variables Age Age of the respondent ; Continuous Gender Dummy: Female=1, Male=0 Long higher education Dummy: =1 if the respondent has completed higher education for 5years or longer, =0 otherwise Middle higher education Dummy: =1 if the respondent has completed 3–4years of higher education, =0 otherwise Short higher education Dummy: =1 if the respondent has completed up to 3years of higher education, =0 otherwise High school education Dummy: =1 if high school  is the respondent's highest education level, =0 otherwise Entrepreneurship education Dummy: =1 if entrepreneurship education is the respondent's highest education level, =0 otherwise Retired Dummy: =1 if the respondent is retired,=0 otherwise Student Dummy: =1 if the respondent is a student, =0 otherwise Skilled worker Dummy: =1 if the respondent is a skilled worker, =0 otherwise White collar  Dummy: =1 if the respondent is a white collar with non-managerial responsibility, =0 otherwise White collar  Dummy: =1 if the respondent is a white collar with managerial responsibility, =0 otherwise Household size Total number of people living in the household; Continuous Apartment Dummy: =1 if the respondent living in an apartment, =0 otherwise Villa/Single-family house Dummy: =1 if the respondent living in a villa or single-family house, =0 otherwise Other types of housing Thisreferstoallrespondentslivinginaccommodationtypesotherthanapartmentandvillaorsingle-familyhouse.Thisisessentially the base category for the accommodation type dummies. Current sorting effort Amount of time the household respondent typically spends on waste sorting and handling ; Continuous Use of recycling centre >5 times a year Dummy: =1 if the respondent use the recycling centre >5 times a year, =0 otherwise Region level 1 Dummy: East=1, West=0 Region Hovedstaden Dummy: =1 if the respondent residing within Region Hovedstaden, =0 otherwise Region Midtjylland Dummy: =1 if the respondent residing within Region Midtjylland, =0 otherwise Region Sjælland Dummy: =1 if the respondent residing within Region Sjælland, =0 otherwise Region Syddanmark Dummy: =1 if the respondent residing within Region Syddanmark, =0 otherwise Region Nordjylland This refers to all respondents residing within Region Nordjylland. Essentially this is the base category for the region dummies. Sorting consciousness Dummy: =1 if the respondent agrees to the statement “I get bad consciousness when/if I do not sort my waste”, =0 otherwise Time for the environment Dummy:=1ifthetherespondentagreestothestatement“Idonotmindspendingsomuchtimeonwastesortinginmyhouseholdbecause I am doing something good for the environment”, =0 otherwise Lifestyle for the environment Dummy:=1iftherespondentagreestothestatement“Icareverymuchabouttheenvironmentandtheimpactsofmylifestyleontheenvironment”, =0 otherwise Scepticism on others Dummy:=1iftherespondentagreestothestatement“EvenifIdosort,Iamnotsureifotherswouldactuallysorttheirhousehold wastes properly”, =0 otherwise Collective work Dummy: =1 if the respondent agrees to the statement “I think it is important to work collectively with my neighbours on waste sorting”, =0 otherwise My neighbours' judgement Dummy:=1iftherespondentagreestothestatement“MyneighbourswilljudgemenegativelyifIdonotsortmyhouseholdwaste”, =0 otherwiseD. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 5 three versions. Furthermore, following Carlsson et al. , the choicesetswerepresentedtotherespondentsinrandomisedsequences in order to mitigate any ordering effect. The design of the experiment wasoptimisedbasedontheD-Efficiencyscoreofthemultinomiallogit  model with assigned priors. The D- and A-Error of the final design are 0.0263 and 1.1293 respectively. The parameter estimates basedontheresultsofthepilotwerethenusedtore-adjustthepriorshencetorevisethedesignofthechoiceexperiment.An example of a choice card can be seen in Fig. 1. The survey was administered online by the consultancy company Userneeds. The survey was finally launched in the period December 28th, 2017 to January 3rd, 2018. An invitation to participate in the surveywassentto7801householdsinDenmarkwhoweremembersof theUserneedspanel.The survey was terminated when the initially agreed number of complete responses was reached i.e. 1011 respondents completed the ques- tionnaire. Given the set-up of the survey administration, information on re- sponse rate is not available. Instead, we use drop-out-rate, which in- dicates the proportion of the respondents who started yet did not complete the questionnaire. The drop-out rate of the present survey is 16 pct., which Userneeds characterizes as a ‘very good’ result. In gen- eral, if the drop-out-rate is higher than 30 pct., Userneeds normally analyses whether there were problems/mistakes in the questionnaire . Collected socio-economic data and other variables considered re- levant for modelling waste sorting behaviour are specified in Table 2. The last six variables listed in Table 2capture internal  motivation and social influence on respondents' choices for household waste sorting. 4. Results 4.1. Demography of the householdrespondents Table 3reports on a range of the survey respondents' socio- demographic characteristics and the comparison between the distribu- tion in the sample and the national figures. The respondents in the sample had an average age of 48years with 50 pct. male and 50 pct. female. Most of the respondents were located in Region Hovedstaden  and fewest in Region Nordjylland . Most of the re-spondents live in single-family houses and apartments. The most fre- quent levelofeducation oftherespondentsis mediumlong education. The occupationofthe respondents varieswith most being non-manual workers with no management responsibility  or retired (23 pct.).Themedianincomeoftherespondents'householdincomebefore tax is in the interval 500.000–599.999 DKK . Themostfrequentsizeofthehouseholds istwo persons . Oursampleisfairlyconsistentwiththenationaldistributionforkey variables such as age, gender, and geographical distribution. Nonetheless, there is also a notable discrepancy in terms of the re- presentation of households in the low-income category and those with more members in the households. In addition, we have slightly more representationofhouseholdswithinthehigh-incomecategories 2inour Scenario  1Scenario  2Scenario  3None Hazardous wasteLocal  collection  pointDrop off to  central  facilityDrop off to  central  facility PlasticRequired to  sortNot required  to sortNot required  to sort Bio-wasteNot required  to sortNot required  to sortRequired to  sort Time use 10 minutes 50 minutes 50 minutes Recycling 95% 60% 70% Frequency of waste collectionTwice a  weekOnce every  two weeksTwice a  week Cost 1,500 DKK 4,500 DKK 4,000 DKK Which option would you  choose?Fig. 1.Example of a choice card. Table 3 Key socioeconomic characteristics of the respondents. Variables Categories Sample distribution (% of total respondents)National distribution  Age  18–34 27.2 29.9 35–53 35.4 34.7 54–75 37.4 35.4 Gender Female 50.0 49.9 Male 50.0 50.1 Education Vocational education18.8 30.3 Primary school 6.5 26.4 Upper secondaryschool10.0 9.9 Short highereducation13.6 4.8 Medium long education31.7 16.6 Long highereducation18.6 9.8 Others 0.7 2.2 Household size 1 29.0 38.0 2 56.0 33.7 3 11.0 11.9 4 3.0 11.1 5 or more 1.0 5.4 Type of housing/ accommodationVilla/single-familyhouse48.5 43.7 Apartment 33.4 38.8 Others 18.1 17.5 Household annual income before tax<300,000 29.35 37.76 300,000–599,999 36.13 32.65 600,000andhigher 34.52 29.6 Region Region Hovedstaden30.0 31.5 Region Midtjylland 22.7 22.7 RegionNordjylland 9.6 10.2 Region Sjælland 15.4 14.4 Region Syddanmark22.3 21.1D. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 6 sample compared with the national distribution (Statistics Denmark, 2019). In the same vein, our sample has more households with higher education levels than those with primary and vocational educational levels. 4.2. Results from choice modelling Table4presentstheresultsfromtheConditionalLogitModel and theLatentClassModel .The models areestimatedbased on complete responses from 1011 respondents. Only 5.6% of the total re- spondents choose the ‘None’ option in all choice cards presented to them. This suggests that the waste sorting options presented in the surveyareconsideredrealisticbytherespondents.Wealsoestimateda model that included the interaction terms between the time attribute and the individual waste categories. These interaction terms are not statisticallysignificantwhichsupportstheinitialmodelspecification,as the attribute time reflects the intensity of effort for the overall sorting for a given scheme hence not attached to a specific waste category. In this section, the focus is on the statistical significance and di- rection of impact of the individual attributes. We return to the magni- tudeoftheindividualparameterestimatesinthefollowingsectionand estimate willingness to pay  for the different choice attributes .TheresultsfromtheCLMshowthat6 outof7attributesincludedinthepresentchoiceexperimentstudyarestatistically significant  in explaining household choices on waste sorting and handling alternatives . We estimate four Latent Class Choice Models with 2, 3, 4, and 5 individualsegmentsrespectively.Basedonthekeymodelstatistics we conclude that a LCM with 4 segments gives a good fit to the data and we choose this LCM model for our further analysis. AscanbeseenfromtheparameterestimatesfortheLCM, therearesomesimilaritiesbetweenthefoursegmentsintermsofwhatinfluences their preferences for waste sorting schemes. All segments demonstrate a positive preference towards schemes which involve sortingofplastic.Conversely,asexpected,theattributestimeandwaste handling fee are statistically significant and negative across all seg- ments.Thisshowsthathouseholdsaremostlikelytogetdiscouragedby wastehandlingschemesthatareexpensiveandburdensomeintermsof time allocation for home waste sorting. Furthermore, the parameter attribute for recycling capacity is statistically significant and positivefor all segments but one. This indicates that households belonging to the three segments  are more likely to take part in waste sortingprogramsiftheytrustthatalargeproportionofthesortedwaste willactuallygetrecycled.Forsegment3,thepreferenceforhousehold waste sorting does not seem to be sensitive to recycling capacity as indicated by the non-statistically significant parameter estimate for recycling capacity attribute for this segment. TheresultsoftheLCMalsohighlightsomedifferencesbetweenthe identified segments . Respondents in segment 1 prefer schemes with the requirement to drop off hazardous waste to a desig-nated facility typically located further away from their residential areas. This can be seen from the statistically significant and negative parameter estimate for hazardous variable for segment 1. In addition, respondents in segment 1 are clearly in favour of waste sorting and handling systems with less frequent waste collection. However, re- spondentsinsegment1donothaveaclearopinionontherequirement tosortbio-waste.Approximately46%ofthesurveyrespondentsbelong to segment 1. We identify households in segment 1 as ‘the frequent waste collection resisters’ . Segment2coversaround17%ofthesurveyrespondents. The preferences of respondents in segment 2 for waste sorting and handling alternatives are largely comparable to those belonging to segment 1. However, while the coefficient for local collection of ha- zardouswasteforsegment1isstatisticallysignificantandnegative,the parameter for the same attribute is statistically non-significant for segment 2. This indicates that respondents in segment 2 appear to be less sensitive to arrangement for hazardous waste handling and col- lection compared to those in segment 1. Moreover, compared toTable 4 Results from CLM and LCM on household waste sorting scenarios. Attributes of household waste sorting and handling options Parameter estimates CLM LCM Segment 1 LCM Segment 2 LCM Segment 3 LCM Segment 4 Hazardous waste −0.0215 −0.3163⁎⁎⁎ −0.2124 2.3677⁎⁎⁎ −0.3676⁎⁎⁎  Plastics 0.4412⁎⁎⁎ 0.5281⁎⁎⁎ 0.5715⁎⁎⁎ 1.2794⁎⁎⁎ 0.2997⁎⁎⁎  Bio-waste −0.0962⁎⁎ 0.1492−0.32000.3415 ⁎⁎ −0.3389⁎⁎⁎  Time −0.0136⁎⁎⁎ −0.0248⁎⁎⁎ −0.0192⁎⁎⁎ −0.0133⁎⁎⁎ −0.0105⁎⁎⁎  Recycling capacity 0.0072⁎⁎⁎ 0.0247⁎⁎⁎ 0.0254⁎⁎⁎ 0.00850.0113 ⁎⁎⁎  Waste handling fee −0.0008⁎⁎⁎ −0.0014⁎⁎⁎ −0.0006⁎⁎⁎ −0.0005⁎⁎⁎ −0.0003⁎⁎⁎  Frequency : 1=once every two weeks 0.3666⁎⁎⁎ 0.7470⁎⁎⁎ 0.1028−0.0892−0.0306 2=once a week 3=Twice a week −0.1070 ⁎⁎⁎ 0.0965⁎⁎⁎ −0.28920.05580.1091 Alternative specific constant −1.9818 ⁎⁎⁎ −4.3399⁎⁎⁎ 2.05381.2968−2.9353 ⁎⁎⁎  Class share 46% 17% 15% 22% Log likelihood −8499.88 −6862.77 AIC 17017.8 13803.5 Standard errors are reported in . ⁎⁎⁎Indicates significance at 1% level. ⁎⁎Indicates significance at 5% level. 2Of the total 1011 respondents, 811 indicated their income level while 161 opted ‘do not wish to answer’ and 39 ‘don't know’.D. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 7 segment1,theimportanceofrecyclingcapacityismorepronouncedin determiningthepreferencesforwastesortingschemesbyhouseholdsin segment 2. This indicates that segment 2 finds it important that the municipality actually has the capacity to utilise the sorted waste. We identify households in segment 2 as ‘the sceptics’ . Segment3coversapproximately15%ofthesurveyrespondents.In general, of all the segments identified through LCM, respondents in segment3demonstratethemostpositiveviewonsortingofplasticsand bio-waste, and at the same time they reveal a clear preference for the possibilitytodisposehazardouswastetoallocatedcontainerwithinthe vicinity of their residences. The parameter estimates for the attributes hazardous waste, plastic and bio-waste are statistically significant and positive . Interestingly, in contrast to the other segments, the parameter estimate for recycling capacity is statistically non-sig- nificantforsegment3whichmaysuggestthatthepreferencesforwaste sorting and handling schemes by respondents in segment 3 seem to be less dictated by the intensity of recycling of the sorted waste. Finally, the respondents in segment 3 appear to be less concerned about how oftenthemunicipalitycollectsthewasteasindicatedbythecoefficient for the attribute frequency being statistically non-significant. We identify households in segment 3 as ‘the sorting enthusiastic’ . Thekeydistinguishingfeaturesofsegment4,makingup22%ofthe survey respondents, are the statistically significant and negative para- meter estimates for the attributes bio-waste and hazardous waste .Thesefindingssuggestthatrespondentsinsegment4arenot interested in waste sorting and handling schemes, which require them toseparatebio-waste.Inaddition,respondentsinsegment4arenotin favour of having local collection points for hazardous waste. Further- more, the preferences for waste sorting schemes by respondents in segment 4 seem to be less influenced by the frequency of waste col- lection as indicated by the statistically non-significant parameter esti- mate for the corresponding attribute. We identify households in seg- ment 4 as ‘the bio-waste sorting resisters’ . 4.3. Impliedvalueoftimeandhouseholdwillingnessto pay for different levels of sorting Basedontheparameterestimatesfortimeuseandwastecollection andhandlingfeeattributeswecalculatetheaveragevalue of time  for waste sorting activities for households in each of the four segments. This implied value of time, in the context of the present research, indicates howmuchthesehouseholdsarewillingtopayinordertospend1hless per week on sorting. The implied value of time is highest for ‘the bio- wastesortingresisters’at46.69DKKperhourfollowed by ‘the sceptics ’ and ‘the sorting enthusiastic ’ at 35.15 DKK and31.32DKKrespectively.Thelowestimplied value of time is observed for ‘the frequent waste collection resisters ’ at 20.72 DKK . Household willingness to pay (see section 3.2 regarding the calcu- lation method) for selected attributes of the waste sorting alternatives presented to the respondents in the choice experiments provide a consistent basis for comparing household preferences . In general‘thesortingenthusiastic’arekeenonhavingthepossibility todisposeofhazardouswasteinanareawithincloseproximitytotheir residence. For such a service, they seem to be willing to pay close to 5000 DKK , which indicates that the option to have a local collectionofhazardouswastehasahighimportanceforthisparticular household group. On the contrary, ‘the frequent waste collection res- isters’and‘thebio-wastesortingresisters’arenotinfavourof theinstallationoflocaldisposalpointsforhazardouswasteasindicated by their negative willingness to pay values. In this regard, ‘the bio- waste sorting resisters’  are 7 times more reluctant than ‘the fre- quent waste collection resisters ’ are. Household preferences for the option to sort plastic are positive across all segments with ‘the sorting enthusiastic’  and ‘the bio-waste sorting resisters’  having the largest willingness to pay forsorting plastics at 2611 DKK  and 1153 DKK  respectively. This suggests that ‘the sorting enthusiastic’  and ‘the bio-wastesortingresisters’aremorekeentosortplasticsthan‘the frequentwastecollectionresisters’and‘thesceptics’are.Our analysis further suggests that, keeping other factors constant, the amount of time households in the different segments are willing to spend on sorting plastics is varied: 21min per week for ‘the frequent waste collection resisters’ , approximately 30min for ‘the sceptics’  and ‘the bio-waste sorting resisters’ , and 96min for ‘the sorting enthusiastic’ . This indicates that although household pre- ferencesforsortingplasticarepositiveingeneral,theintroductionofa system that requires more effort  will re- ducetheirutilitygainfromplasticseparation.Theresultsconfirmthat ‘thesortingenthusiastic’arethemostinterestedinsortingplastics; the amount of time they are willing to spend on waste separation is three to four times as much as what the other segments are willing to allocate. Contrasting preferences among segments towards the requirement to sort bio-waste are evident. While ‘the sorting enthusiastic’  dis- playapositiveWTPforsortingbio-wasteataround700DKK, a negative WTP is observed for ‘the bio-waste sorting resisters’  at twice the magnitude. This shows that for households belonging to the segment4,sortingbio-wasteaccruessubstantialinconveniencecost.In general, recycling capacity has a positive influence on household pre- ferences for home waste separation. Nevertheless, the WTP estimates show that the likely effect of increase in recycling capacity on pre- ferences for home waste sorting are more pronounced (slightly more than twice as much) on ‘the sceptics’  and ‘the bio-waste sorting resisters’  compared with ‘the frequent waste collection resisters’ . Thefrequencyofwastecollectionappearstobeofconcernonlyfor ‘thefrequentwastecollectionresisters’.Thefindingsshowthat‘thefrequentwastecollectionresisters’arereluctanttochoosefrequent waste collection in general. 4.4. Drivers of the waste sorter typology Findings from the probit analysis offer insights into the extent to which sociodemographic characteristics relate to the heterogeneity of household preferences for waste sorting alternatives . The results also indicate the importance of habits and personal and social motivation for waste sorting. Parameter estimates in Table 6are from the best specification for each segment following stepwise estimation.As such,Table 6only reports the variables appearing in the best spe- cification. Marginal effects are provided in Appendix 1. Itis important tonotethat,asindicatedbythepseudoR2valuesreportedin Table6, in general the explanatory power of households' socio-demographiccharacteristicsandattitudinalfactorsinexplainingtheheterogeneityof households' waste sorting preferences is low. The results show that households that frequently use the recycling centre are more likely to belong to segment 1 – ‘the frequent waste collectionresisters’.Householdsinthissegmentaredrivenbyself- consciousnesstosortwaste.Forsegment2–‘thesceptics’,gender turns out to be an important predictor where male respondents are morelikelytobelongtothissegmentthanfemalerespondentsare.This segment is also characterized by households who live in villas/single- family houses and who are not frequent users of the recycling centre. Moreover,householdsareunlikelytobelongtothissegmentiftheyare self-conscious about sorting and about the impacts of their lifestyle choices on the environment. In the same vein, households who are concerned about their neighbours' judgement on their waste sorting behaviour are unlikely to belong to this segment. Segment 3 – ‘the sorting enthusiastic ’ is characterized by re- spondents being female, living in apartments, and non-students. In addition, households in segment 3 are not keen on travelling to andD. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 8 usingtherecyclingcentre.Moreover,theresultsshowthatrespondents whoagreewiththestatementthatitisimportanttoworktogetherwith their neighbours on waste separation are less likely to belong to seg- ment 3. In other words, the waste sorting behaviours of households in thissegmentdonotappeartobedrivenbytheroleofcollectiveefforts on waste sorting. Respondents currently spending relatively a lot of time on waste sorting and handling tend to belong to segment 4 - ‘the bio-waste sortingresisters’.Themarginaleffectsindicatethata change in the current time allocation for waste sorting by 1min per weekleadstoanincreaseintheprobabilityby0.0022forahousehold to belong to segment 4. Employment status also appears to be an im-portantdeterminantofsegment4.Theresultsindicatethatrespondents with“White collar ”employment areless likelyto be ‘thebio-wastesortingresisters’.Moreover,respondentshavingself- consciousnesstowardswastesortingarealsolesslikelytobelongtothis segment. 5. Discussion Drawing on a national scale choice-experiment survey , thepresentresearchoffersnewinsightsintohouseholdpreferencesfor waste sorting and handling in Denmark. We investigated the micro- economic aspects of household waste sorting preferences in Denmark, withthefocustoinvestigatehouseholdpreferencesfordifferentmodes of home waste sorting. More specifically, households were able to evaluate and hence make trade-offs between the following factors: al- ternativearrangementfordisposalofhazardouswaste,requirementfor sorting plastic and bio-waste, time demand for waste sorting and handling,thecapacityforrecyclingatmunicipalitylevel,thefrequency and the fee of waste collection and handling service by the munici- pality. Previous choice-experiment studies have analysed respondents' evaluation of the complexity of home waste sorting through the in- clusionofanattributeforthenumberofwastecategoriestobesorted. Based on a study on kerbside recycling services in London, Karousakis and Birol  found that their respondents were more likely to choosekerbsideservicesthatcollectmorewastecategories.Inthesame vein,Czajkowskietal. andCzajkowskietal. foundthat, based on a study in Poland, their respondents preferred to sort waste into more categories compared to fewer categories. While the pre- viouslymentionedstudiesshowthattherespondentsaremorelikelyto chooseahomesortingsystemwithmorewastecategories,thecontrary was reported by Sakata . Reporting on a study from Japan, Sakata  found that increasing the number of categories to sort,Table 5 Household's willingness to pay for different features of waste sorting alternatives. Willingness to pay  for: ‘The frequent waste collection resisters’ ‘The sceptics’  ‘The sorting enthusiastic’ ‘The bio-waste sortingresisters’  Local collection point for hazardous waste −229.20 DKK−337.13 DKK 4832.14 DKK−1413.77 DKK Option to sort plastic 382.71 DKK  907.22 DKK (121.96 Euro)2611.02 DKK (351.01 Euro)1152.77 DKK  Option to sort bio-waste 108.12 DKK   −507.95 DKK  696.90 DKK  −1303.38 DKK  Recycling capacity 17.90 DKK 40.30 DKK17.37 DKK 43.58 DKK  Frequencyofwastecollection:onceeverytwoweeks(as opposed to once a week)541.27 DKK 163.24 DKK −182.08 DKK  −117.77 DKK  Frequencyofwastecollection:twiceaweek(asopposed to once a week)69.89 DKK −459.09 DKK  113.98 DKK  419.81 DKK  ns: not statistically significant . Table 6 Resultsfromprobitanalysis:socio-demographicandattitudinaldeterminantsof segmentation of household waste sorting preferences. Variables Parameter estimates Segment 1 – ‘the frequent waste collection resisters’Segment 2 – ‘the sceptics’ Segment 3 – ‘the sorting enthusiastic’ Segment 4 – ‘the bio- waste sorting resisters’ Gender na −0.3140 ⁎⁎⁎ 0.3128⁎⁎⁎ na Student  na na −0.4900⁎⁎ na White collar (non- managerial) na na na −0.2805⁎⁎  Apartment na na 0.3147⁎⁎ na Villa/single-family housena 0.3154 ⁎⁎ na na RegionMidtjylland 0.1980 na na na Current sorting effort na na na 0.0076 ⁎⁎⁎  Use of recycling centre >5 times a year0.2480 ⁎⁎⁎ −0.2667⁎⁎ −0.4118⁎⁎⁎ na Sorting consciousness0.3766⁎⁎⁎ −0.2797⁎⁎ na −0.3336⁎⁎⁎  Lifestyle for the environmentna −0.2534⁎⁎ na na Collective work 0.1826 na −0.2455⁎⁎ na My neighbours' judgementna −0.5369⁎⁎⁎ na na Constant −0.5058⁎⁎⁎ −0.5973⁎⁎⁎ −1.0073⁎⁎⁎ −0.6585⁎⁎⁎  Pseudo R2 0.0320 0.0667 0.0569 0.0274 Standard errors are reported in . ns=not statistically significant . na=removedduringstepwiseestimationhencenotappearin the specification of the selected model. ⁎⁎⁎Indicates significance at 1% level. ⁎⁎Indicates significance at 5% level.D. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 9 results in negative utility for the respondents. In the present research, we tackle the issue by incorporating attributes for the handling of specificwastecategoriesand by specifying how long it would take for respondents to carry out a particular home sorting system . Findings from thepresentresearchindicatethathouseholdshavedifferentpreferences towards the sorting arrangements of specific waste fractions. Never- theless, in general we found that the longer the time it requires to implement a sorting system the less likely a household is going to choose a given sorting scheme. Frequency of waste collection has been considered an important factorthatdeterminestherateofhomewastesorting.Basedonastudy on waste separation services in Beijing, Yuan and Yabe  pre- sentedtwolevelsofwastecollectionfrequency:onceperdayandtwice per week in their survey. Karousakis and Birol  presented three levelsoffrequencyofwastecollection:fortnightly,weekly,andtwicea weektotheirrespondents. Czajkowskietal. specifiedthewaste collection frequency as categorical attribute with three levels: once a month , twice a month, and four times a month. Yuan and Yabe  andKarousakis and Birol  treated waste collection as a linear variable in their model specification and foundthat their respondents prefer more frequent waste collection. The findings from Czajkowski et al.  also indicate that their re- spondents gain utility from more frequent waste collection. In the present study, based on the LCM, the frequency of waste collection attribute is only statistically significant for one of the four segments. Furthermore, contrary to findings reported from previous studies, the present research indicates that one segment of the respondents in our studyactuallypreferslessfrequentwastecollection.Nonetheless,inour choiceexperiment,whiletheattributeforwastecollectionfrequencyis also categorical with three levels, the level specification is slightly different from that of Czajkowski et al. . In our choice experi- ment, the levels are once every two weeks, once a week, and twice a week. BasedontheLCM,thehouseholdsinourstudycanbegroupedinto four segments with regard to their home waste sorting preferences. Even if these four segments share similar responses towards selected features of home waste sorting alternatives (i.e. positive preference towards sorting plastic waste and negative reaction towards waste collectionfeeandtimedemandforsorting),thedegreeoftheinfluence differs between segments. To illustrate, the average willingness to pay estimatefortheoptiontosortplasticfor‘thesortingenthusiastic’is 6timesashighasfor‘thefrequentwastecollectionresisters’.This suggests that, compared with ‘the frequent waste collection resisters’ , ‘the sorting enthusiastic’  has much higher preference for a waste sorting scenario with plastic separation. The four segments can be further distinguished based on a number of factors. Households in segment 1 (‘the frequent waste collection resisters’ ) prefer the existing arrangement for dropping off ha- zardouswasteatadesignatedwastefacilityawayfromtheirresidential areas. In addition, households in this segment appear to be very sen- sitivetohowoftenwastecollectiontakesplace.Householdsinsegment 2 ) appear to be indifferent towards the option for local collection point for hazardous waste. Households in segment 3 ) – which have a majority of women - have positive preferences towards the possibility for disposing ha- zardous waste within close proximity to where they live and towards the requirement to sort plastic as well as bio-waste. Households in segment 4 ) are not very keen on the idea of having a local collection point for hazardous waste. They also demonstrate a negative preference towards bio-waste sorting. Using a probit model we have identified a range of household socio- demographiccharacteristicsincludinggender,typeofaccommodation, and occupation as determinants of the heterogeneity of households' waste sorting preferences. To illustrate, female respondents, living in apartments and who are not currently studying are more likely tobelongto‘thesortingenthusiastic’.Additionally,ourfindingsshow thatrespondents'currenthabitsonsortinganduseofrecyclingfacilities appeartobeimportantpredictorsofwastesortingpreferencesforsome segments. To illustrate, in our research, a higher frequency of use of a recycling centre is closely related to the likelihood of belonging to the ‘frequent waste collection resisters’ , while the opposite relation is evident for the ‘the sorting enthusiastic’ . Previousstudieshavediscussedthesignificanceofpersonalintrinsic motivation as well as social pressures in explaining household beha- viours with regards to waste sorting and handling (Czajkowski et al., 2017;Leeetal.,2017; HellerandVatn,2017).Inthepresentresearch, the aforementioned attitudinal factors were found statistically sig-nificant in explaining household preferences for alternative waste sorting schemes. For ‘the frequent waste collection resisters’ , in general the preference towards waste sorting by households in this segment has positive association with their internal motivation i.e. being self-conscious about the need for waste sorting. The opposite trend of association between personal motivation and waste sorting behavioursisevidentfortwosegments-‘thesceptics’and‘thebio- waste sorting resisters’ . Furthermore, our findings also show that the role ofsocial pressures is only statistically significant and negative in explaining the preference of only one segment - ‘the sceptics’ . For the ‘sorting enthusiastic’ , their waste sorting behaviour does not appear to be dictated by external motivation; as indicated by the statistically significant and negative relation between belonging to segment 3 and agreement with the importance of collective effort to handle waste sorting with neighbours. In the present research, we are able to derive the implied value of time that reflects variation in household preferences for home sorting. We estimate the implied value of time for each of the four segments basedonthecorrespondingparameterestimatesfortimeattributeand annualbill forwastecollectionattribute. Wefoundthat‘the bio-waste sorting resisters’  has the highest implied value of time of 46.69DKKperhourwhile‘thefrequentwastecollectionresisters’ hasthelowestimpliedvalueoftimeof20.72DKKper hour. Meanwhile the implied values of time for ‘the sceptics’  and ‘thesortingenthusiastic’are35.15DKKand31.32DKK respectively.Itisnoteworthythateventhehighestimplied value of time of 47 DKK  per hour is still lower than the minimumwageforDenmarkofapproximately110DKKper hour. The results indicate that sorting waste at homes still incurs op- portunitycostoftimetohouseholds.Atthesametime,thefindingalso suggeststhatthevalueoftimeforpro-environmentalactivitiessuchas home waste sorting is not necessarily comparable to wage earning ac- tivities. Our finding is somewhat consistent with other studies albeit using a different approach. Bruvoll and Nyborg , Bartelings and Sterner , 1999, Berglund  reported respondents' willingness to pay for having others to sort waste being substantially lower than the average wage rate. Huhtala  estimated the ‘time cost’ for re- cycling efforts by assuming the value ofspare time at half ofthe wagerate. Literature from other fields, such as transportation studies, also pointsoutthatthevalueofleisuretimeisdifferentfromthewagerate .Directlycomparingtheopportunitycostof time for household waste sorting derived from this study with those reported by earlier studies is rather problematic. This is partly due to the fact that the other studies were undertaken using different metho- dologicalapproachesandadopteddifferentassumptionswithregardto the appropriate value of time for waste sorting or recycling activities. Our research, to the best of our knowledge, is the first attempt to ex- plicitly capture the opportunity cost of time associated with waste se- paration at household level. All in all, the present research shows that, although in general Danishhouseholdsaresupportiveofahomewasteseparationprogram, theirpreferencesforparticipationareheterogeneousandareinfluenced byawiderangeoffactors.Forexample,somehouseholdsarenotkeen on sorting bio-waste and are very critical about how much effort theyD. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 10 havetoputintosortingactivities). For these households, the opportunity cost of time hence the incon- venience cost of household waste sorting is high. Meanwhile, other households are enthusiastic to sort different categories of waste in- cluding bio-waste, however they are the only segment infavour ofthe proposed provision of local collection points for hazardous waste. As such, for households belonging to this segment – ‘the sorting en- thusiastic’ , the existing system requiring households to drop off certain categories of waste  to a designated facility,whichistypicallylocatedawayfromresidentialareas,seemsto be sub optimal. Furthermore, being convinced that their efforts for sorting is worthwhile (as indicated by the proportion of waste getting recirculatedtotheeconomy)isimportant,theeffectsappeartobemore pronounced on some groups  and ‘the bio-waste sorting resisters’ ). Itisimportanttoacknowledgeacaveatthatfinanciallylessaffluent and less educated households are slightly underrepresented in our samplesurvey.Thesehouseholdsmaydisplaywastesortingpreferences that are different from those households with higher education and income level. Nevertheless, the findings from the present research in- dicate the need to consider household heterogeneous preferences to- wards different sorting levels when policy makers or municipalities develop future planning for waste sorting programs for example in termsofrollingoutnewsortingsystemsorcustomizingcurrentsorting policy.Findingsfromthepresentstudycanforexampleprovideabasis for the development of campaign or outreach and flexible instruments to encourage household compliance on waste sorting. There may be scopeforallocatingpublicexpendituretopubliceducationonrecycling . At the very least, the findings provide indica- tions forpolicy makers/municipalities, that specificmandatory sorting schemes are not likely to lead to 100% efficacy, as parts of the popu- lation may have negative utility associated to a specific scheme. This mightleadtoacertaincategoryofwasteactuallyendingupinageneralwaste bin for example. 6. Conclusion The present research investigates to what extent different factors influence household preferences for different alternatives for waste sortingandhandlingathome.Weemployedachoice-experimentbased survey targeting households across Denmark and obtained 1011 com- pleteresponsesforchoicemodelling.Findingsfromtheresearchoffers further insight into the scientific understanding surrounding the scope for getting households on board with home sorting. More specifically theresearchshedsfurtherlightonthreeareas.Firstly,previousstudies refer to the number of categories of waste to sort as an attribute todepicthowdemandingthedifferenthomewastesortingschemeswould betotherespondents.Inourresearch,weapproachthesubjectmatter bypresentingscenariosintermsofhowtherespondentsareexpectedto handle specific types of waste (i.e. plastic, bio-waste, and hazardous waste).Inadditionweincludeanattributefortheexpectedamountof time as a proxy for the intensity of effort the respondents will have to devote on a weekly basis should they choose a specific home waste sorting system. Secondly, by having time and waste collection fee at- tributes in the choice set ups, we are able to approximate the implied value of time respondents ascribe on home sorting. Our findings in- dicate that the values range between 21 and 47 DKK  perhour,whichisonlyafractionoftheminimumwageforDenmarkof approximately DKK 110 . This shows that home sorting ac- tually incurs opportunity cost of time to households. However, the value of time for pro-environmental activities such as home waste sorting cannot be directly estimated from wage earning activities. Thirdly,withtherelativelylargesizeofthesampleinourstudy(1011 households) we were able to model the heterogeneity of preferences amongtherespondentswithregardtodifferentoptionsofhomewaste sorting. Using the Latent Class Choice Model, we found that the re- spondents could be differentiated into four groups reflecting their un- ique preferences for home waste sorting. The heterogeneity in their preferences is particularly related to how households in each of these four segments respond to the following factors: the option to have a localcollectionpointforhazardouswaste,therequirementtosortbio- waste, and the frequency of waste collection. We also found that the segmentation of the households hence the heterogeneity in household preferences forhome waste sortingis to a certain extent related tothe sociodemographic characteristics of the respondents including gender, occupation, and the type of housing where respondents reside. Moreover, respondents' current level of waste sorting effort as well as personal motivation and social influence were found to be important predictorsofsomesegments.Overallfindingsfromthepresentresearchsuggest that household preferences for home waste sorting and hand- ling are not homogeneous. Households express different appreciations towardsdifferent aspectsofhomewastesortingsystems.Thisneedsto beconsideredinthedevelopmentofpolicyinitiativesformoreeffective sortingsystemsandmoresupportfromthepublicatlargeasmanifested through greater compliance. Acknowledgment ThisresearchisfundedbytheMinistryofEnvironmentandFoodof Denmark and Danish Centre for Environment and Energy, Aarhus University. Appendix 1. Marginal effects of probit analysis: sociodemographic and attitudinal determinants of segmentation of household waste sorting preferences Variables Marginal effect Segment1–‘thefrequentwastecollection resisters’ Segment 2 – ‘the scep-tics’ Segment 3 – ‘the sorting enthu-siastic’ Segment 4 – ‘the bio-waste sortingresisters’  Gender  na −0.0665 ⁎⁎⁎ 0.0681⁎⁎⁎ na Student  na na −0.1066⁎⁎ na White collar  na na na −0.0803⁎⁎  Apartment  na na 0.0685⁎⁎ na Villa/single-family house  na 0.0668⁎⁎ na na Region Midtjylland 0.0762  na na naD. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 11 Current sorting effort (minutes per week)na na na 0.0022⁎⁎⁎  Use of recycling centre >5 times a year 0.0955⁎⁎⁎ −0.0565⁎⁎ −0.0900⁎⁎⁎ na Sorting consciousness 0.1450⁎⁎⁎ −0.0593⁎⁎ na −0.0955⁎⁎⁎  Lifestyle for the environment na −0.0537⁎⁎ na na Collective work 0.0703 na −0.0534⁎⁎ na My neighbours' judgement na −0.1138⁎⁎⁎ na na Standard errors are reported in . ns=not statistically significant . na=removed during stepwise estimation  hence not appear in the specification of the selected model. ⁎⁎⁎Indicates significance at 1% level. ⁎⁎Indicates significance at 5% level. References Abbott, A., Nandeibam, S., O’shea, L., 2011. Explaining the variation in household re- cycling rates across the UK. Ecol. Econ. 70, 2214–2223. Adamowicz, W., Louviere, J., Swait, J., 1998. Introduction to attribute-based stated choicemethodsintroductiontoattribute-basedstatedchoicemethods. Availableat. http://www.greateratlantic.fisheries.noaa.gov/hcd/statedchoicemethods.pdf. Bartelings, H., Sterner, T., 1999. Household waste management in a Swedish munici- pality: determinants of waste disposal, recycling and composting. Environ. Resour. Econ. 13 , 473–491. Beharry-Borg, N., Smart, J.C.R., Termansen, M., Hubacek, K., 2013. Evaluating farmers’ likely participation in a payment programme for water quality protection in the UKuplands. Reg. Environ. Chang. 13 , 633–647. Berglund, C., 2006. The assessment of households’ recycling cost: the role of personal motives. Ecol. Econ. 56, 560–569. Bolius,2016..4myteromaffald,derikkepasser. Downloaded09.11.2018 at.https://www.bolius.dk/4-myter-om-affald-der-ikke-passer-24613/. Borrello, M., Caracciolo, F., Lombardi, A., Pascucci, S., Cembalo, L., 2017. Consumers' perspective on circular economy strategy for reducing food waste. Sustainability 9, 1–18. Boxall, P.C., Adamowicz, W.L., 2002. Understanding heterogeneous preferences in random utility models: a latent class approach. Environ. Resour. Econ. 23 ,421–446. Brekke, K.A., Kipperberg, G., Nyborg, K., 2010. Social interaction in responsibility as- cription: the case of household recycling. Land Economics 86 , 766–784. Bruvoll, A., Nyborg, K., 2002. On the Value of Households’ Recycling Efforts. Research Department of Statistics Norway  Discussion Paper No. 316. Bruvoll,A.,Halvorsen,B.,Nyborg,K.,2000.Householdsortingofwasteatsource.Econ. Surv. 4, 26–35. Caplan, A.J., Grijalva, T.C., Jakus, P.M., 2002. Waste not or want not? A contingent ranking analysis of curbside waste disposal options. Ecol. Econ. 43, 185–197. Carlsson, F., Mørkbak, M.R., Olsen, S.B., 2012. The first time is the hardest: a test of ordering effects in choice experiments. J. Choice Model. 5 , 19–37. Choi,B.C.K.,Pak,A.W.P.,2005.Acatalogofbiasesinquestionnaires.Prev.ChronicDis. 2 . Christensen, T., Pedersen, A.B., Nielsen, H.O., Mørkbak, M.R., Hasler, B., Denver, S., 2011. Determinants of farmers’ willingness to participate in subsidy schemes for pesticide-free buffer zones—a choice experiment study. Ecol. Econ. 70, 1558–1564. Craighill, A.L., Powell, J.C., 1996. Lifecycle assessment and economic evaluation of re- cycling: a case study. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 17 , 75–96. Czajkowski, M., Kadziela, T., Hanley, N., 2014. We want to sort! Assessing households’ preferences for sorting waste. Resour. Energy Econ. 36 , 290–306. Czajkowski, M., Hanley, N., Nyborg, K., 2017. Social norms, morals and self-interest as determinants of pro-environment behaviours: the case of household recycling. Environ. Resour. Econ. 66 , 647–670. Directive2008/98/EC,2008.Directive2008/98/ECoftheEuropeanParliamentandthe Council of 19 November 2008 on Waste and Repealing Certain Directives. down- loaded 30.05.2018 at. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri= CELEX:32008L0098&from=EN. EuropeanCommission,2018.CircularEconomy:newruleswillmakeEUtheglobalfront- runner in waste management and recycling (European Commission – Press Release 22.05.2018), downloaded 30.05.2018 at. http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP- 18-3846_en.htm. Gilli, M., Nicolli, F., Farinelli, P., 2018. Behavioural attitudes towards waste prevention and recycling. Ecol. Econ. 154, 294–305. Gradus, R.H.J.M., Nillesen, P.H.L., Dijkgraaf, E., van Koppen, R.J., 2017. A cost-effec- tivenessanalysisforincinerationorrecyclingofDutchhouseholdplasticwaste.Ecol. Econ. 135, 22–28. Greene, W.H., 1986–2012. NLOGIT Version 5 Reference Guide. Econometric Software, Inc., Plainview, NY, USA. Greene, W.H., Hensher, D.A., 2003. A latent class model for discrete choice analysis: contrasts with mixed logit. Transp. Res. B Methodol. 37 , 681–698. Available at. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0191261502000462, Accesseddate: 15 January 2014. Greiner, R., 2016. Factors influencing farmers’ participation in contractual biodiversity conservation: a choice experiment with northern Australian pastoralists. Aust. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 60 , 1–21. Heller, M.H., Vatn, A., 2017. The divisive and disruptive effect of a weight-based waste fee. Ecol. Econ. 131, 275–285. Hong,S.,Adams,R.M.,Love,H.A.,1993.Aneconomicanalysisofhouseholdrecyclingof solidwastes:thecaseofPortland,Oregon.J.Environ.Econ.Manag.25,136–146. Huhtala, A., 2010. Income effects and the inconvenience of private provision of public goods for bads: the case of recycling in Finland. Ecol. Econ. 69, 1675–1681. Huysman, S., De Schaepmeester, J., Ragaert, K., Dewulf, J., De Meester, S., 2017. Performanceindicatorsforacirculareconomy:acasestudyonpost-industrialplastic waste. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 120, 46–54. Ingeniøren, 2012 . Årsagerne til at Danmark holdt op med at sortere husholdningsaffald. Downloaded 09.11.2018 at https://ing.dk/artikel/arsagerne-til- danmark-holdt-op-med-sortere-husholdningsaffald-127368 Jara-Díaz,S.R.,Munizaga,M.A.,Greeven,P.,Guerra,R.,Axhausen,K.,2008.Estimating thevalueofleisurefromatimeallocationmodel.Transp.Res.BMethodol.42,946–957. Karousakis,K.,Birol,E.,2008.Investigatinghouseholdpreferencesforkerbsiderecycling services in London: a choice experiment approach. J. Environ. Manag. 88 , 1099–1108. Kipperberg,G.,2007.AcomparisonofhouseholdrecyclingbehaviorsinNorwayandthe United States. Environ. Resour. Econ. 36, 215–235. Kipperberg,G.,Larson,D.M.,2012.Heterogeneouspreferencesforcommunityrecycling programs. Environ. Resour. Econ. 53, 577–604. Lee,M.,Choi,H.,Koo,Y.,2017.Inconvenience costof wastedisposalbehavior inSouth Korea. Ecol. Econ. 140, 58–65. Mik,J.,Schöner,G.,Schuurmans,A.,2016.Contributingtoacirculareconomybyputting zero waste and resource efficiency in the focus. In: CESB 2016 - Central Europe Towards Sustainable Building 2016: Innovations for Sustainable Future. Nyborg, K., Howarth, R.C., Brekke, K.A., 2006. Green consumers and public policy: on socially contingent moral motivation. Resour. Energy Econ. 28, 351–366. Riber, C., Petersen, C., Christensen, T.H., 2009. Chemical composition of material frac- tions in Danish household waste. Waste Manag. 29, 1251–1257. Rose, J.M., Hess, S., 2009. Dual response choices in pivoted stated choice experiments. Transp. Res. Rec. 2135 , 25–33. Sakata,Y.,2007.Achoiceexperimentoftheresidentialpreferenceofwastemanagement services – the example of Kagoshima city, Japan. Waste Manag. 27, 639–644. Scheepens, A.E., Vogtländer, J.G., Brezet, J.C., 2016. Two life cycle assessment  based methods to analyse and design complex  circular economy systems.Case: making water tourism more sustainable. J. Clean. Prod. 114, 257–268. Sidique,S.F.,Lupi,F.,Joshi,S.V.,2010a.Theeffectsofbehaviourandattitudesondrop- off recycling activities. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 54, 163–170. Sidique, S.F., Joshi, S.V., Lupi, F., 2010b. Factors influencing the rate of recycling: an analysis of Minnesota counties. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 54, 242–249. StataCorp , Stata Statistical Software: Release 11, College Station, TX: . Statistics Denmark, 2019. INDKF102: Pre-tax Income by Region, Unit, Owner/Tenant of Dwelling, Family Type and Income Interval for 2017. https://www.statistikbanken. dk/10331, Accessed date: 7 December 2019. Swait, J., 1994. A structural equation model of latent segmentation and product choice for cross-sectional revealed preference choice data. J. Retail. Consum. Serv. 1 ,77–89. Train, K., 2003. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press, New York. UNIDO, 2017. Circular Economy. United Nations Industrial Development Organization  downloaded 30.05.2018 at. https://www.unido.org/sites/default/files/ 2017-07/Circular_Economy_UNIDO_0.pdf. Userneeds, e-mail communication, 04.01.2018. Yuan, Y., Yabe, M., 2015. Residents’ preferences for household kitchen waste source se- paration services in Beijing: a choice experiment approach. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 12 , 176–190.D. Nainggolan, et al. Ecological Economics 166  106402 12 

