Digitalisation and intelligent robotics in value chain of circular economy oriented waste management – A review R. Sarca,⇑, A. Curtisa, L. Kandlbauera, K. Khodierb, K.E. Lorbera, R. Pombergera aDepartment of Environmental and Energy Process Engineering, Chair of Waste Processing Technology and Waste Management, Montanuniversitaet Leobe n, Franz-Josef-Straße 18, A-8700 Leoben, Austria bDepartment of Environmental and Energy Process Engineering, Chair of Process Technology and Industrial Environmental Protection, Montanunivers itaet Leoben, Franz-Josef-Straße 18, A-8700 Leoben, Austria article info Article history:Received 28 March 2019Revised 18 June 2019Accepted 21 June 2019 Keywords: DigitalisationIntelligent roboticsWaste management Circular economy Industry 4.0Internet of ThingsReWaste4.0Waste treatmentSmart waste factoryabstract The general aim of circular economy is the most efﬁcient and comprehensive use of resources. In order to achieve this goal, new approaches of Industry 4.0 are being developed and implemented in the ﬁeld of waste management. The innovative K-project: Recycling and Recovery of Waste 4.0 - ‘‘ReWaste4.0 ” deals with topics such as digitalisation and the use of robotic technologies in waste management. Here, a sum- mary of the already published results in these areas, which were divided into the four focused topics, is given: Collection and Logistics, Machines and waste treatment plants, Business models and Data Tools.Presented are systems and methods already used in waste management, as well as technologies that have already been successfully applied in other industrial sectors and will also be relevant in the waste man- agement sector for the future. The focus is set on systems that could be used in waste treatment plants ormachines in the future in order to make treatment of waste more efﬁcient. In particular, systems whichcarry out the sorting of  waste via robotic technologies are of interest. Furthermore ‘‘smart bins” with sensors for material detection or level measurement, methods for digital image analysis and new business models have already been developed. The technologies are often based on large amounts of datathat can contribute to increase the efﬁciency within plants. In addition, the results of an online market survey of companies from the waste management industry on the subject of waste management 4.0 or ‘‘digital readiness” are summarized. /C2112019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Contents 1. Introduction ......................................................................................................... 4 7 7 1.1. Status and development of municipal waste management in the EU . . .............................................................. 4 7 7 1.2. Digitalisation and intelligent robotics as modern tools for development . . . . . . . . . . ......................................... 4 7 8 1.3. Digitalisation and intelligent robotics in the value chain of circular economy oriented waste management. ...................... 4 7 9 2. Materials and methods . . . . . . . ......................................................................................... 4 7 9 3. Results and discussion . . . . . . . . ......................................................................................... 4 8 0 3.1. Waste collection and logistics . . . . . . . . . ............................................................................ 4 8 1 3.1.1. Smart bins and level measurement . . . . . . . . . ................................................................. 4 8 1 3.1.2. Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................. 4 8 2 3.1.3. Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................. 4 8 2 3.1.4. NFC/RFID tags in products and trash button. . ................................................................. 4 8 2 3.2. Machines and waste treatment plants. . . ............................................................................ 4 8 2 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.06.035 0956-053X/ /C2112019 Published by Elsevier Ltd.Abbreviations: BIM, Building Information Modelling; BM, Business Models; CL, Collection and Logistic; CNN, Convolutional Neural Networks; DACH-region, ‘‘Germa ny- Austria-Switzerland-Region”; DT, Data Tools; EMS, Electromagnetic Sensor; EPC, Engineering, Procurement and Construction; GI, General Informa tion; HMI, Human Machine Interface; ICT, Information- and Communication-technology; IoT, Internet of Things; LIBS, Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy; MIR, Mid-infra red; MP, Machine and Plants; M2M, Machine-to-Machine; NFC, Near Field Communication; NIR, Near-Infrared; PCNN, Pertained Convolutional Neural Networks; PMPG HW, Pap er, Metal, Plastic and Glass household waste; RFID, Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation; SWFN4.0, Smart Waste Factory Network; VIS, Visible; XRF, X-Ray-Fluorescence; XR T, X-Ray-Transmission. ⇑Corresponding author. E-mail address: renato.sarc@unileoben.ac.at .Waste Management 95  476–492 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Waste Management journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/wasman

3.2.1. Volume- and mass flow measurement incl. sensors . ........................................................... 4 8 3 3.2.2. Image evaluation . . . . . . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 3 3.2.3. Waste sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 4 3.2.4. Quality assurance . . . . . . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 8 3.2.5. Human-Machine-Interface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........................................................... 4 8 8 3.3. Business models . . . . . . . ......................................................................................... 4 8 8 3.3.1. Digital communication. . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 8 3.3.2. Predictive maintenance . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 8 3.3.3. Product as a service . . . . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 8 3.4. Data tools. . . . . . . . . . . . . ......................................................................................... 4 8 8 3.4.1. Blockchain-Technology. . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 8 3.4.2. Statistical design of experiments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........................................................... 4 8 9 3.4.3. Building information modelling  . . . . . . . . . . . . ........................................................... 4 8 9 3.4.4. Multivariate analysis . . . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 9 3.4.5. Deep Learning. . . . . . . . . . . . . .............................................................................. 4 8 9 3.5. Market survey . . . . . . . . . ......................................................................................... 4 8 9 4. Conclusions. . . . ...................................................................................................... 4 9 0 Declaration of Competing Interest . . . . ................................................................................... 4 9 0 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................... 4 9 0 References . . . . ...................................................................................................... 4 9 1 1. Introduction As part of the project: Recycling and Recovery of Waste 4.0 - ‘‘ReWaste4.0 ” at the Chair of Waste Processing Technology and Waste Management of the Montanuniversitaet Leoben, new pro- cess, plant and machine concepts for new and existing secondary raw material markets are being developed on a scientiﬁc and tech- nical level. For the ﬁrst time, new ‘‘Industry 4.0” approaches (e.g. ‘‘digital networking”, ‘‘robotics”, etc.) will be elaborated for the waste management sector to further develop waste management towards circular economy. Special focus lies on the examination and implementation of digitally connected recycling- and recovery processes with the highest quality . 1.1. Status and development of municipal waste management in the EU Relevant for this contribution is mainly waste that can be assigned to the waste main group ‘‘municipal waste”, which has been deﬁned by the European Union in Directive 2018/851 amend- ing Directive 2008/98/EC on waste in Article 3  as follows : ‘‘Municipal Waste means:  mixed waste and separately collected waste from households, including paper and cardboard, glass, metals, plastics, bio-waste, wood, textiles, packaging, waste electrical and electronic equip- ment, waste batteries and accumulators, and bulky waste, includ- ing mattresses and furniture;  mixed waste and separately collected waste from other sources, where such waste is similar in nature and composition to waste from households; Municipal waste does not include waste from production, agricul- ture, forestry, ﬁshing, septic tanks and sewage network and treat- ment, including sewage sludge, end-of-life vehicles or construction and demolition waste.‘‘ The European Circular Economy Package redeﬁnes the required recycling rates and the maximum landﬁll rate for municipal waste. Article 11  of the amendment to Directive 2008/98/EC on waste  states the following: ‘‘In order to comply with the objectives of this Directive, and move to a European circular economy with a high level of resource efﬁ- ciency, Member States shall take the necessary measures designed to achieve the following targets:... by 2025, the preparing for re-use and the recycling of munic- ipal waste shall be increased to a minimum of 55% by weight;  by 2030, the preparing for re-use and the recycling of municipal waste shall be increased to a minimum of 60% by weight;  by 2035, the preparing for re-use and the recycling of municipal waste shall be increased to a minimum of 65% by weight.‘‘ Article 5  of the amendment to Directive 1999/31/EC on the landﬁll of waste  states: ‘‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that by 2035 the amount of municipal waste landﬁlled is reduced to 10% or less of the total amount of municipal waste generated (by weight). ” In order to meet the demands of the target rates set by the EU, the member states are required to optimize the national waste management in the direction of circular economy. To verify compliance with the municipal waste targets set out in the guidelines, the following points, as set out in Article 11a , become valid following the amendment of Directive 2008/98/ EC on waste : ‘‘For the purpose of calculating whether the targets laid down in points ,  and  of Article 11  and in Article 11  have been attained:  Member States shall calculate the weight of the municipal waste generated and prepared for re-use or recycled in a given calendar year;  the weight of the municipal waste prepared for re-use shall be calculated as the weight of products or components of products that have become municipal waste and have undergone all neces- sary checking, cleaning or repairing operations to enable re-use without further sorting or pre-processing;  the weight of the municipal waste recycled shall be calculated as the weight of waste which, having undergone all necessary checking, sorting and other preliminary operations to remove waste materials that are not targeted by the subsequent reprocess- ing and to ensure high-quality recycling, enters the recycling oper- ation whereby waste materials are actually reprocessed into products, materials or substances.‘‘ The dynamic change in the operation performance of municipal waste management - divided into the three treatment categories: Landﬁlling, incineration, recycling and composting - was publishedR. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 477 byPomberger et al.  using the ‘‘RIL ternary diagram method”. For the visualisation, information on waste amounts and their treatment was obtained from Eurostat and used as a data basis. By taking into account the data between the years 1995 and 2017 , the following results can be shown for the individual EU Member States 28 and for the EU 28  : The position of performance at a speciﬁc time, the dynamic changes in performance over a certain period of time and the development trend of performance. The presentation allows countries to be assigned to one of three ‘‘groups” due to their recycling and landﬁlling rate: ‘‘Recovery Countries”, ‘‘Transi-tion Countries” and ‘‘Landﬁlling Countries”. Especially for the group ‘‘Landﬁlling Countries”, waste management still offers great potential for further development. The dynamic change in the per- formance of municipal waste management for EU 28 and the evo- lution needed to meet the recycling rates set by the circular economy package are shown in Fig. 1 . 1.2. Digitalisation and intelligent robotics as modern tools for development In order to have a common understanding of the individual terms, according to Tschandl et al.  , they are deﬁned as follows. ‘‘Digitalisation” generally describes the integration of digital technologies into everyday life. This integration is called ‘‘Industry 4.0” because it embodies the fourth industrial revolution. The Eng- lish term is ‘‘Internet of Things”  and is divided into two parts: ‘‘Industrial Internet of Things” and ‘‘Consumer Internet of Things”. In the literature, as Tschandl et al.  show, no uniform def- inition for the term Industry 4.0 has yet been established. How- ever, the different deﬁnitions can be used to derive the following general deﬁnition: Industry 4.0 describes the widespread introduc- tion of information and communication technology  as well as its connection to an Internet of Things, Services and Data with the goal of real-time control of production and value chain networks. Autonomous objects (workpieces, storage and conveyor systems, robots and machinery and equipment), mobile communication, real-time sensors/actuators and ICT enable a paradigm shift, from once centralized controls to a decentralized, ﬂexible coordination of self-controlling processes. As a result, it is possible to react quickly, decentrally and ﬂexibly to customer requirements and to produce large numbers of variants with simultaneously low batchsizes economically, as well as introduce new, customer-oriented business models successfully, which will further increase compet- itiveness. Every company has to ﬁnd or deﬁne its own combination and roadmap for Industry 4.0 The term ‘‘smart factory” is summarized by Tschandl et al.  as follows: ‘‘Individual companies or corporate groups that use ICT for product development, production, logistics and inter- face coordination with customers in order to respond more ﬂexibly to incoming requests. A smart factory masters complexity, is less disruptive and enables a more efﬁcient production. The communi- cation between people, machines and resources is self-evident andcomparable to a social network.” Digitalisation and automated work processes have already been state-of-the-art in many industry sectors for some years (e.g. auto- motive industry) and are mainly used to reduce the need for phys- ically strenuous work and to make processes more efﬁcient for human workers. In the distinction of robot types they can for example be divided into the groups: service robots (e.g. vacuum cleaner robot, lawnmower robot, pool cleaning robot, assistant robot for handicapped people, etc.), mobile robots (similar to ser- vice robots or as e.g. driverless transport robots for logistics sys- tems, toy robots, exploration robots, etc.), humanoid robots (e.g. multifunctional machines, assistant for humans, etc.) as well as industrial robots (e.g. welding robots, painting robots, palletizing robots, mounting robots, etc.). Due to the focus on the use of the technology in plants relevant to waste management, mainly indus- trial robots were considered in this contribution. These differ mainly in the type of kinematics , in the load, in the acceleration and speed, in the repeatability, in the gripping system and in the reachable working range ( Dokulil, 2001; Shah and Pandey, 2018 ). Especially in the industry-sector so-called collaborative robots , which are specially designed to work with people in the immediate or same work environment, gain more and more importance. Cobots are for example used to end a work process started by a human worker, or vice versa. An important factor in using Cobots is the concept of a shared workplace. In order to make this possible, a reduction in the speed and power of the robot arm is necessary, as well as the additional equipment for the robot with special sensors that detect the position of people present and are able to respond accordingly ( TÜV Austria Group and Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH, 2016 ). Examples of Cobots include the lightweight robot ‘‘iiwa”  Fig. 1. Left: Development of municipal waste management in the EU 28 from 1995 to 2017 with the statistical forecasts (linear extrapolation according to the n ew circular economy package) until 2035. Right: Required development area of the ‘‘Landﬁlling Countries” and EU 28  to meet the recycling targets (modi ﬁed from: Pomberger et al.  with currently available data in 2019).478 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 and the model ‘‘LBR iisy” from KUKA, the model ‘‘YuMi” from the manufacturer ABB, and the models from Festo ( ABB Robotics, 2019; Festo, 2019; KUKA, 2019 ). According to statistics from the IFR - International Federation of Robotics  , 2017 was a record year in the installation of robots in the automated manufacturing industry: on average, 106 new robotic units were installed per 10,000 employees in Europe. The leaders in the global ranking were South Korea with 710 robots, Singapore with 658 robots and Germany with 322 robots per 10,000 employees. In total, around 381,300 robotic units were sold worldwide in 2017, which represents an increase of 30% com- pared to the previous year. The fastest growing use of robots is shown in Asia and Australia, but growth is also evident in Europe and America . 1.3. Digitalisation and intelligent robotics in the value chain of circular economy oriented waste management The comparison of waste management with other industrial sectors shows that digitalisation and the use of robots in circular economy and waste management are still in their infancy. How- ever, as the digitalisation and approaches of Industry 4.0 are rapidly developing in all sectors, more and more applications for the aforementioned technologies are emerging especially for use in waste management. Surveys by NETWASTE concluded that the topic of e-commerce already has a high priority for many waste disposal businesses. Companies use waste portals on the internet, are represented on various platforms for social media or make their own apps available to customers. In the future, digitalisation in waste management is estimated to be relatively high. The use of electronic invoices, paperless order execution and the use of ser- vice portals will be estimated at over 60% in the future. The extent to which the use of systems for live container tracking and digital container detection, or the use of robots for waste collection and sorting, to self-automated containers and collection vehicles will be relevant for the future is for the most part still unclear. How- ever, at least 30% of the respondents see a great importance in the future of the points mentioned . For this arti- cle, technologies of digitalisation were speciﬁcally investigated for the use in the so-called ‘‘Smart Waste Factory Network”. The given deﬁnition from Curtis and Sarc  is part of the ReWaste4.0 project and deﬁned as follows: ‘‘The SWFN4.0 describes a system consisting of several waste treat- ment plants, which perform different tasks in the waste manage- ment system and are interconnected via data streams and logistics systems (e.g. sorting plants, production plants for Solid Recovered Fuels, etc.). The individual processes and machines within the plants as well as the individual plants are digitally con- nected with each other. This connection of the individual machines and systems and the real-time analysis of the waste streams enable dynamic process control and various actuator systems actively intervene in the processes. In addition, people can cooperate inter- actively with the technology around them. ” Subsequent chapters explain and discuss the procedure for developing the article and the objectives and results pursued. Sec- tion 3 is divided into the ﬁve main focuses: Section 3.1 focuses on ‘‘smart bins” (e.g. waste collection con- tainers equipped with sensors for material detection or level mea- surement), self-automated containers and vehicles, and methods for automatic image analysis. Section 3.2 mainly deals with the sorting of waste by robotic technologies and compares systems from different manufacturers on the market. In addition, the data- or model-based optimized operation of treatment plants is discussed. The topics of digital communication, which makes itfor example possible, to order container systems for disposal via internet platforms, predictive maintenance and product as a ser- vice are covered in Section 3.3 . In order to simulate or carry out processes in waste management plants, large amounts of data are needed as a basis. In terms of material quality in particular, metrological recording  represents a major challenge. Methods for utilizing this data, such as for example Blockchain Technology, Deep Learning and multivariate model equations are discussed in Section 3.4 . Finally, the results of an online market survey about digitalisation and Industry 4.0 of companies relevant for the waste management sector will be presented (see Section 3.5 ). Furthermore, the present article compares the examined topics in a scientiﬁc summary and gives an overview of future applicable technologies, which contribute to the further development of cir-cular economy in the waste management sector. The economic importance of this topic was discussed in a study about ‘‘Digitalisa- tion in the Green Tech Industry” by Berger  , where a global amount for the sector circular economy/waste management was estimated at around 170 billion euros  for the year 2025. 2. Materials and methods The aim of this contribution is to capture the developments and opportunities in waste management about digitalisation and intel- ligent robotic technologies as far as possible (or almost com- pletely), to investigate them professionally and to present them in a ‘‘scientiﬁc review”. In particular, the aspects that contribute to digitalisation in the value chain of circular economy oriented waste management are brought into focus. The procedure which led to the following results included the following steps: /C15Market survey, with approx. 400 evaluable feedbacks, /C15Deﬁnition of the four relevant topics in the value chain in waste management: 1. Collection and logistics, 2. Machines and waste treatment plants, 3. Business models and 4. Data tools. /C15Extensive survey of national and international publications and information in the period 2001–2019 and assignment to the rel- evant topics in the value chain. In total, more than 80 relevant publications are discussed in the present article (see Figs. 2 and3), /C15Carrying out the intense analysis of the ﬁgures, data and facts found for the area waste management. Within the framework of the K-Project ReWaste4.0 - as already mentioned before - an online market survey of companies from the waste management and waste disposal industry on the topic of digitalisation and waste management 4.0 was performed. The online survey was conducted by means of a questionnaire with nine questions. The survey was by an e-mailed online survey car- ried out on 2350 companies of various sizes from the ﬁelds of waste management and recycling technology in the DACH-region . In total, 394 companies com- pleted the questionnaire and responded to us, which corresponds to an evaluation rate of 32.5%. The questions with answers and additional company comments from the survey are presented in detail by Sarc and Hermann  and summarized as part of this article in Section 3.5 . From the results obtained, the four segments for the value chain mentioned above were deﬁned. The contributions of the literature were established via databases with the following relevant search terms : ‘‘digitalisation”, ‘‘robotics”, ‘‘smart waste”, ‘‘smart factory”, ‘‘industry 4.0”, ‘‘internet of things”, ‘‘waste management” andR. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 479 ‘‘circular economy”. These search terms were used individually and in all possible combinations for the search. For the evaluation of the results of this scientiﬁc contribution, relevant publications could be found over the period from 2001 to 2019, although the majority are from the last three years . In addition, detailed research was conducted on existing technologies in the environmental ﬁeld, with a focus on waste management . The information and applications gained were in turn assigned to the four previously deﬁned value chain seg- ments. In the research, especially the areas of digitalisation, (intel- ligent) robotic technologies and Industry 4.0 came to the fore. The following Figs. 2 and3compare the results of the research carried out. A total of 115 sources could be utilized. It should be noted that only sources with content relevant for waste management were considered in the graphics, resulting in a total of 85 relevant liter- ature sources. In addition, legal regulations were used for drafting the contribution, which are not considered in the illustrations shown. The ﬁgures show that the topics digitalisation and intelli- gent robotics in waste management, have yet not intensively been discussed in peer-reviewed papers and most of the informationcomes from technology- and platform-manufacturers (websites, brochures, etc.).As shown in Fig. 2 the number of entries in/from 2019 com- pared to the years before is particularly high, as the literature research for the ﬁnalisation of the present paper has taken place this year and much information (especially from the manufactur- ers’ websites) has been used. These sources are all considered in 2019 unless stated otherwise. In order to keep the information regarding the number of existing sources meaningful, manufac- turer information was considered separately. When interpreting the chart, note that all manufacturer information is reported as non-peer-reviewed. In the next step, the found sources (i.e., Fig. 2 ) have been assigned to the thematic emphases (i.e. value chain segments), cf. Fig. 3 . As shown in Fig. 3 , from 2001 to 2018, the topics CL and MP were predominantly examined, while nowadays  the focus is on BM with digital platforms and product as a service approaches. 3. Results and discussion ‘‘Big Data” is a fundamental element of digitalisation and already a valuable raw material for many industries. In combina- tion with ‘‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence”, it is possible to structure, analyse, evaluate and use large amounts of data as a basis for 0246810121416 2001 bis 20112012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019number year of publicationCL MP BM DT GI Fig. 3. Type of source  assigned to the priorities covered therein over the years 2001–2019. Note: CL - Collection and logistics, MP - Machines and waste treatment plants, BM - Business models, DT - Data tools, GI - General information. 05101520253035 2001 bis 20112012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019number year of publicationnon-Peer-Reviewed Peer-Reviewed Manufacturer Information Fig. 2. Number of reviewed literature sources by type, assigned to peer-reviewed or non-peer-reviewed papers over the years 2001–2019.480 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 software programs that can generate new  know- ledge with the technology of ‘‘Machine Learning”. From this, future forecasts can be derived as well as used in optimization measures. Often ‘‘Deep Learning” is used, which is based on the human brain and uses artiﬁcial neural networks to mimic the learning processes of humans. This makes it possible to use data volumes meaning- fully across the entire value chain . Just like in other industrial sectors, the use of digitalised sys- tems in waste management is becoming increasingly interesting and, as a driver of innovation, is opening more and more opportu- nities for businesses: robotic systems learn from experience and can sort more efﬁciently. In addition, the speed of the conveyor belts can be independently controlled by means of self-learning machines. Great opportunities are seen for disposal companies, especially in the ﬁeld of logistics through route optimization, as well as intelligent collection containers. The US company ecoATM shows how efﬁcient recycling of old mobile phones could work with the device ‘‘electronic waste ATM”, which is similar to an ATM: The machine checks the old mobile phone to the value of the device, determines the reusable raw materials contained and pays the same value to the customer . This princi- ple would also be conceivable for other existing waste materials. At present, digital availability  in waste manage- ment companies of German-speaking countries is only 30% , which leaves big opportunities for these companies to use digitalisation. The global demand for ‘‘green products” and acceptance of the basic idea of a green economy is increasing. This expansion is also reﬂected in the market volume: In 2013, the glo-bal market volume amounted to 2536 billion euros. By 2025, an increase of up to 5385 billion euros ( €) is predicted. Of this, around 100 billion euros  were spent on the circular economy in 2013. This amount will rise to 170 billion euros  by 2025 ( Berger and Büchele, 2014 ). An important aspect that must be considered when using industrial robots is the safety requirement for systems and machines located therein, where the legal framework of the Machinery Directive of the European Council (Directive 2006/42/EC) must be taken into account. Here, are amongst others, the following standards are relevant: EN ISO 10218-1 , EN ISO 10218-2 (design speciﬁcations and requirements for the robot system), ISO/TS 15066 , EN 12100 (Safety of machinery - Risk Assessment and Risk Mitiga- tion), EN 13849-1 , EN 13849-2 .In principle, industrial robots are rated with a high security risk, with the result that protection concepts are designed in such a way that humans and robots work separately in terms of time and/or location. In order to differentiate the work area of a robot, both mechanically separating  and non-separating installa- tions  are used. This can lead to greater space requirements and additional costs due to the necessary struc- tural facilities. Newer concepts put so-called human-robot- collaborations in focus. These are designed in a way that people and robots work directly together without guards, and machines support people with their abilities. ( TÜV Austria Group and Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH, 2016 ). In addition, it must be borne in mind that the connection and networking of robots or actu- ator systems with the internet must also increase security measures against cyber-attacks . Especially with robots, which can be controlled by employees via remote maintenance, increased safety concepts are necessary. The relevance of security to cyber- attacks on industrial robots was examined and published in a 2017 Trend Labs report . In the present article, no fur- ther, more detailed explanations about safety-related requirements are considered, since, as already mentioned in Section 2 , four rele- vant value chain segments in waste management are the focus of the current investigation which are presented and discussed below. 3.1. Waste collection and logistics In recent decades, waste management has evolved from a pure logistics industry to a manufacturing industry due to the ever- increasing volume of waste and the trend towards recycling. Nev- ertheless, logistics continues to be an important means of linking the waste management sector with the rest of the industry. Ongo- ing new technical possibilities through digitalisation make it possi- ble to optimally further develop logistics in waste management. There are already various approaches, which are explained in more detail in the following sections of the article. In addition, several peer-reviewed papers have already been published which deal with the topic ‘‘Collection and logistics of waste” in so-called ‘‘smart cities” ( Anagnostopoulos et al., 2017; Esmaeilian et al., 2018; Rovetta et al., 2009; Shah et al., 2018 ). 3.1.1. Smart bins and level measurement There are different approaches and designs in the ﬁeld of ‘‘smart bins”. Various manufacturers equip containers with sensors capable of detecting levels to make disposal more proﬁtable (Bigbelly Solar, 2019; Binando, 2019; E Cube Labs, 2019; Enevo, Data for market analysisDigital  Aftersales  ServiceImprovement of customer experience Product as a Service Dynamic RoutingQuality assurance Ontime Quality  assuranceClarification of guarantee claim Communication  Billing modelAutonomous vehicles Predictive MaintenanceRobotics Data analysisMARKETING SALES PRODUCTION LOGISTICSMATERIAL FLOW  MANAGEMENTDISPOSAL  PROVIDERS Digitalisation along the value chain Fig. 4. Digitalisation along the value chain .R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 481 2019 ). In households, smart speakers like ‘‘Amazon Echo” or ‘‘Google Home” spread quickly and provide a convenient way to gather information. For example, Simple Human  offers a trash can, which can be opened and closed with voice control or hand gestures. In addition, further development in terms of customer advice for waste classiﬁcation, or independently ﬁnd and propose suitable disposal solutions could be a future option. Furthermore, the development of autonomous robots for waste collection brings another possibility. The ﬁrst research projects focused on autonomous robotic solutions for waste collection already in 2006: The DustBot project focused on the development of autonomous systems from 2006 to 2009 with the aim of improv- ing the urban hygiene and waste management of European capi- tals. In the course of the project, different autonomous cleaning robots for the streets  were developed, as well asmobile robots with user-friendly design . Customers can order DustCarts to desired addresses, where they pick up smal- ler amounts of household wastes and bring them to a correspond- ing waste collection centre . A more recent research project was initiated in 2015 under the collaboration of the Swedish car manufacturer Volvo and the German waste management company Renova. A self-propelled, mobile robot  was developed, which is able to ﬁnd gar- bage cans in the area and transports them to a collection vehicle. The ﬁrst prototype has been around since mid-2016. The emptying of containers works in such a way, that a drone searches for waste bins in the area and sends the corresponding coordinates to the robot. The robot is attached to the collection vehicle and is able - with the help of the coordinates, sensors and cameras - to ﬁnd the bin, pick it up, transport it to the collection vehicle and return the empty container. At the moment, Volvo does not see the pro- ject as mature, because it is too slow to actually be used. The pro- ject leader says ‘‘ ...the project is intended to stimulate imagination and test new concepts that can inﬂuence new trans- port solutions of the future” . Other companies have developed collection systems with inte- grated material detection sensors, allowing separation into differ- ent fractions. The French manufacturer ‘‘Green Creative” presented a waste bin named ‘‘R3D3” in 2016, which collects bev- erage packaging  in separate compartments within the container ( Green Creative, 2019 ). Also, the Polish company ‘‘Bin-e” offers a device with similar functionality. In addition, according to the manufacturer, the Smart Bin is equipped with Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Deep Learning func- tion and sends the determined material data to external databases, which can then be downloaded to other waste bins from the same manufacturer, thus improving the identiﬁcation of materials. The networking of the waste bin also allows disposal companies tobe informed about the ﬁlling level of the individual containers . According to the manufacturer, the target groups of the two products are ofﬁces, large households, airports, shop- ping malls, etc. 3.1.2. Vehicles Autonomous vehicles are often used in industries, especially in mining ( Komatsu, 2019; Liebherr-International Germany GmbH, 2017; Sandvik, 2019; Volvo Germany, 2019; Volvo, 2019 ) and are gaining even more importance in passenger transportation ( Tesla, 2019 ). Especially for waste management, a project for an autono- mous collection vehicle was started. The cooperation between the car manufacturer Volvo and the waste management company Renova has adapted the concept of the self-driving Volvo FMX truck for mining operations, which has been tested in mines in northern Sweden since 2016. Practical tests have also been carried out for the driverless collection vehicle. The truck no longer needs a driver, because the route is pre-programmed and the fact that thevehicle is equipped with sensors and cameras allows the truck to take moving obstacles into account and avoid them. The driver has the task to bring the full waste bins to the vehicle and to empty them. Via a control panel at the rear of the vehicle, the driver can continue or interrupt the route of the vehicle . The lack of acceptance of new technologies by users is unlikely due to the rapid technological development. However, in the intro- duction of autonomous disposal vehicles and containers, obstruction might be unresolved legal issues, such as for example liability issues when accidents are caused. In addition, there are already initial considerations and concepts for how underground disposal can be used in future smart cities (Alphabet, Sidewalk Labs, 2019 ). At the moment, however, this option is not economi- cally viable. 3.1.3. Routing /C15The topic of routing in waste management was scientiﬁcally discussed and researched in detail in the following contribu- tions, which are listed below with summarized ﬁndings. Hannan et al.  : This review article deals with information and communication technology and their usage in the waste management sector (e.g. identiﬁcation technologies, data com- munication technologies, routing, real time bin status informa- tion, etc.). /C15Mes et al.  : The contribution considers ‘‘inventory rout- ing” for dynamic waste collection. /C15Ramos et al.  : The article reviews different approaches for implementing dynamic routing and gives overall information about the use and beneﬁts of real-time data in the waste man- agement sector. /C15Rossi et al.  : The paper discusses routing of autonomous vehicles in transportation networks with various model systems. 3.1.4. NFC/RFID tags in products and trash button This topic (NFC: near-ﬁeld communication, RFID: radio- frequency identiﬁcation) is discussed in the article by Hannan et al.   and is also already used in combination with an application for mobile phones, to commission disposal services . 3.2. Machines and waste treatment plants In many industry sectors, plant components have long been connected and control each other because they e.g. react on pres- sure and/or temperature gradients . In the waste management sector, this connection has not fullyenforced yet. The reason for this is the heterogeneous composition of waste streams, which makes the  modelling of work processes and especially the status detection of the material ﬂows  more difﬁcult. With advances in technology and the increasing demands  on recycled materials, there are increasing opportunities to implement Industry 4.0 approaches in different ways in plants relevant for waste management. Waste management systems often consist of a combination of complex individual machines. For their interaction, however, very simple control mechanisms are frequently relevant, which can be measured by means of a few system parameters (e.g. starting of the conveyor belt takes place when the level sensor on the unit gives a signal). In the future, digitalised waste treatment plants will be controlled dynamically, as many different sensors will provide information about the operating status of a plant. Additionally, the status of the material ﬂow at the input in the plant and after each treatment step will be detected via information about the482 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 qualities, mass and volume of the individual material ﬂows. Machine-to-Machine  technology will also be used to allow machines to optimally conﬁgure each other. Due to the large num- ber of waste streams, the optimal treatment results in a variety of processes which have different inﬂuenceable process parameters. The on-line/on-time characterisation of the quality of the material ﬂows takes account of corresponding information in the control of the plant or aggregates, which regulates itself accordingly. In addi- tion, research on new sensor technologies , laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy , terahertz) will make a major contribution to make sorting into individual material frac- tions possible (especially for materials difﬁcult to detect, such as black plastics) or determine the composition of objects at the par- ticle level. Similarly, robotic technology will play an important role in waste sorting. The combination of object recognition, multivari-ate statistical modelling approaches and Deep Learning tools will be used for tasks that are too dangerous or too stressful for humans . Furthermore, innovative  safety installations for waste treatment plants will also be interesting. Especially in recent years, more and more ﬁres occurred in treatment plants, because a higher amount of ﬁre-promoting waste  occurs in waste streams .Gundupalli et al.  have published an article which covers technologies for automated sorting of mixed waste, but they don’t put focus on robotic technologies. 3.2.1. Volume- and mass ﬂow measurement incl. sensors In most waste treatment plants, mass ﬂows are measured into and out of the plant by weighing the arriving and departing vehi- cles by means of a weighbridge. The weighing data is usually obtained with great delay only and the input and output currents are always buffered via bunkers. In many cases, the shovels of wheel loaders are equipped with weighing devices, so the system throughput can roughly be determined. However, these methods do not allow the control of a plant, as all important mass ﬂows would have to be recorded in real time. There are many systems on the market that use a variety of physical principles that allow real-time measurement. In the industry, the following measuringsystems are used: belt scales, impact plates, radiometric measure- ment, operating time measurement , laser trian- gulation, etc. Not all systems are suitable or desired for the use in waste treatment plants for various reasons (including cost, accu- racy and radiation protection). The retroﬁtting of weighing belts is often not possible due to the limited space. Many waste fractions  have a very low bulk density and thereforecannot be measured accurately. The value added in the treatment of mixed non-hazardous waste is very low and therefore expensive systems such as e.g. radiometric systems (including the employ- ment of a radiation protection commissioner), laser systems, etc. are not enforced until now. In waste management, quantities are expressed in masses . On the other hand, there are sys- tems that measure the operating time of emitted signals as well as laser triangulation, which calculates volumes and volume ﬂows. In order to be able to convert these volume ﬂows to mass ﬂows, it is necessary to know the bulk density of the material. However, it is not constant in time or in the course of the preparation process and would have to be measured continuously in order to calibrate the system in real time and to obtain the resulting mass ﬂows. The ret- roﬁtting of a system with volumetric ﬂow measuring systems is much easier since the necessary measuring beams equipped withthe measuring technology are simply mounted over the respective conveyor belts. One way to perform a rough density calibration would be to recognize the material through images via Machine Learning using material density databases. An example on the signiﬁcance of material ﬂow management in waste treatment plants is given by Feil et al.  . They present a sensor-based process control concept to achieve a continuous material ﬂow, which should result in optimal conditions for further treatment in the plant . Currently leading manufacturers in the ﬁeld of sensor-based sorting in Europe are Binder + Co AG , BT-Wolfgang Binder GmbH , Pellenc ST , Steinert Elektromagnetbau GmbH  and Tomra Systems GmbH  . The mentioned companies offer the sensor technologies listed in Table 1 (amongst others) for different applications. Especially for the use in sorting with robotic technologies, a 3D perception sensor was designed by the start-up roboception. Together with the German robot manufacturer KUKA, the KUKA_3D Perception Sensor was developed, which is able to create 3D recordings in real time and can record the positioning in the room. In addition, there is the possibility to perform different ‘‘bin-picking” applications with the sensor using manufacturer software . 3.2.2. Image evaluation Currently the Chair of Automation at Montanuniversitaet Leoben is doing research on imaging combined with Deep Learning to enable the automatic classiﬁcation of waste in processing plants. The goal is to be able to classify the type, contents and state of waste prior to or during processing. This classiﬁcation should enable the automatic parameterisation of the waste processing Table 1 Overview of sensor technologies . Sensor Separation criteria Scope of application VISaColour Glass, Paper-Cardboard-Cardboard Packaging, Plastics, Metals NIRbChemical composition Paper-Cardboard-Cardboard Packaging, Plastics, Wood; problematic for black plastics XRTcDensity Plastics, Metals, Inert fraction from construction sites, Wood XRFdElemental composition Metals, Plastics  EMSe/inductive sensor Electrical conductivity Metals MIRfChemical composition Black Plastics Terahertz-spectroscopy Chemical composition In research LIBSgChemical composition Aluminium-alloys, Plastics, Wood aSensor with spectrum in the range of visible light. bNear-infrared. cX-ray-transmission. dX-ray-ﬂuorescence. eElectromagnetic sensor. fMid-infrared. gLaser induced breakdown spectroscopy.R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 483 equipment to obtain better and hopefully near-optimal performance. The approach is to acquire images of the waste in situ using industrial cameras and to apply Deep Learning to automatically generate classiﬁcations pertaining to the content, type and state of the waste. Deep convolutional neural networks  can be considered in several different layers; the lower layers detect prim- itive features in the images. This task is highly generic; conse- quently, it is possible to use pertained networks  for these layers. This is known as transfer learning, since it is transferring the neural coefﬁcients which are required to detect primitive fea- tures in the images, from other applications. The upper layers are then trained to identify the presence of the classes’ speciﬁc to the application at hand as combinations of the primitive features. These PCNN have the advantage of saving training time, whilesimultaneously requiring fewer images to obtain a successful con- vergence of the trained network. To date, studies on methods for digital image analysis have been published by Bonifazi et al. ; Gundupalli et al.  and Wagland et al.  . 3.2.3. Waste sorting Many industrial robots are commonly used to perform assem- bly line operations with very precise but equal sequences, which requires data-based pre-programming. The challenges of using robotic technologies to sort waste are the heterogeneity and sur- face contamination of the waste streams, the inconsistent shapes or masses that must be grabbed, and the random location of the objects in the waste stream. Furthermore, it is considered to be problematic that the positions of the particles or objects on the conveyor belt can change by vibrations or the draft (arising by the movement on the conveyor belt). The resulting problem is, that the detected position changes and the actuator  grabs ‘‘into space” and the object is ultimately not sorted out. For waste sorting, the processes for material or object recogni- tion with the associated algorithms and the software in the back- ground are of great importance. If this software is combined with suitable hardware and an additional implementation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence is carried out, robotic systems are able to fulﬁl multi- tasking tasks and thus perform several sorting tasks at the same time. If necessary, new fractions can be ‘‘trained”, making the tech- nology very future-proof in terms of changing waste streams. The robots used in some cases replace human sorters and/or ﬁnd appli- cation in areas  that have not been sortable until now and/or allow automatic quality assurance and enhancements . Especially in the area of construction and demolition waste, the use of robotic technologies for sorting is very interesting, as the sorting by humans is restricted on the onehand by the limited object size  and on the other hand by the dust produced during processing (including asbestos) ( AMP Robotics, 2019; BHS, 2019a, 2019b; Kujala et al., 2016; Lukka et al., 2014; ZenRobotics, 2019 ). In some cases, pre- shredding of the material up to a certain particle size is necessary. The developers of robotic technologies do not see robotic waste sorting in all areas as a future solution. Especially in the area of municipal solid waste , in particular, packaging waste, many manufacturers see the combined use of robotic technologies and optical sensor sorting systems with pneumatic discharge as the ideal solution for the future. Often, the automated devices are also found as a quality assurance system at the end of the sorting sys- tem to monitor the output ﬂow from a plant. Various research projects have been involved in the develop- ment of robotic technologies for the sorting of radioactive waste in the past. Mainly human-controlled robots have been used to perform certain work in radiation-contaminated areas. Two recent European research projects focused on the development of amodern robotic system for the sorting of nuclear waste. In the project RadioRoSo , a system with automatic or semi-automatic sorting by dual-arm robots and robotic cranes was developed . The project RoMaNS  also dealt with the same topic. The focus was on the development of novel hardware and software for remote-controlled robots as well as the programming of automatic gripping gestures and algo- rithms to automate robot movements ( European Commission, 2015; University of Birmingham, 2015 ). Researchers at the Danish Institute of Technology  have been working on the development of a robotic-based system that uses Artiﬁcial Intelligence to sort hazardous waste as part of the AAWSBE1 (Adaptive Automated Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Sorting Battery Extraction) project. The focus is onthe sorting of batteries in electrical devices. Therefore, it is neces- sary to detect devices that could contain batteries, but also to detect individual batteries in material ﬂows. The system works with signals from different cameras and Deep Learning technology . As an example of material recycling of a very speciﬁc material group, the concrete recycling robot ERO can be mentioned, which allows the automatic demolition of concrete walls . The electronics manufacturer Apple has also developed a robot for a very speciﬁc recycling process. The two projects LIAM and DAISY focus on the recovery of selected materials  and their return to the raw materials cycle. Launched in 2016, LIAM was developed for the deconstruction of iPhones and consistsof a chain of 29 individual robots, which successively disassemble old iPhones and remove a total of eight components from the device (including: display, battery, motherboard, speakers, camera, housing, etc.). This is achieved by special suction devices, drills, attachments as screwdrivers and heating devices to solve adhesive joints, etc. Furthermore, complex safety devices are installed, which interrupt the process when the development of heat caused by the battery is to strong . At the end of April 2018, DAISY - as a successor to LIAM - was introduced by Apple. The recycling robot is now able to disassemble different iPhone models into its individual parts, which was not possible with the ﬁrst robot and criticized. Now, the disassembling process for one unit just under 20 s are needed, which leads to a maximum capacity of 200 iPhones per hour . The following subsequent subchapters (i.e. Sections 3.2.3.1 to 3.2.3.7 ) present several systems for waste sorting designed for mixed waste streams. 3.2.3.1. ZenRobotics heavy picker. ZenRobotics company, based in Helsinki, Finland, was founded in 2007. Based on the sorting of construction and demolition waste, the ZenRobotics Heavy Picker was developed in 2009 and since then has been continuously improved. The system is equipped with gripper arms and can sort out contaminants, as well as recyclables from mixed waste streams with the help of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. The number of fractions to be sorted is unrestricted  and can be continuously extended during operation. The ‘‘training” of a new fraction is done with desired sample fractions. The system consists of different sen- sors, a control unit and industrial robots . The waste is on a conveyor belt which moves under the robotic arm at a speed controlled by the robot. In operation, the sensor unit scans the material which is analysed by the specially programmed control software. In addition, the software has the task of controlling the robots, as well as identifying the materials of the waste and the gripping points. With these calculated gripping points, the pneu- matic operated gripping arm  grips the corresponding object and sorts it into the respective fraction while taking the484 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 trajectory parabola under consideration ( Lukka et al., 2014; ZenRobotics, 2019 ). To identify the objects and their materials, the system uses dif- ferent sensors and cameras (VIS-, NIR-, metal-, 3D-laser sensors, RGB cameras), which send data to the control software. There the combination of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning algo- rithms are able to identify the individual objects form the data and determine the optimal gripping sequence from so-called ‘‘han- dles” ( Burkowski and Lukka, 2011, Burkowski and Rehn, 2015, Lukka and Borkowski, 2011, Lukka and Kujala, 2017, Valpola, 2011 ). A single robotic arm is capable of sorting out up to four different fractions simultaneously. Currently, ZenRobotics customers are sorting construction and demolition waste, industrial waste, met- als, wood, hard plastics, and bags by colour. The tangible objects are limited to a maximum weight of 30 kg and maximum dimen-sions of 1500 mm by 500 mm. The gripper arm is capable of 2000 picks per hour. If necessary, it is possible to connect several robot arms in succession to increase the output of the plant . The following reference companies are mentioned by the man- ufacturer: Finland , Sweden , The Netherlands , Switzerland , Japan , Australia , France , China  and USA (Recon Services Inc., Texas). Mainly construction and demolition waste are sorted, whereby the sorting is carried out by the robotic system alone oralso in combination with human workers for pre-sorting . 3.2.3.2. SELMA. The Swedish company OP-teknik specialises in automation technology and has developed an automatic sorting system called SELMA, together with the German machine manu- facturer Doppstadt. The robot arms used are multi-axis robots from the Japanese manufacturer Yaskawa and can, as shown in Fig. 6 ,b e connected in series in the system. Each arm with the mechanical gripper creates up to 2400 picks per hour. With a recommended combination of the manufacturers of six arms, this results in 14,400 picks per hour. The system can also be set up and trans- ported as a mobile unit in a container . According to the manufacturer, the system can be used to sort various mate- rials, including wood, stone, concrete, bricks, metals, cardboard, foam, plastics, polystyrene, etc. ( Doppstadt, 2019, OP teknik ab, 2019 ). 3.2.3.3. ZenRobotics Fast Picker. The ZenRobotics Fast Picker has also been developed by the Finnish manufacturer ZenRobotics and is a system which, in contrast to the ZenRobotics Heavy Picker, does not specialize in sorting heavy construction and demolitionwaste but rather smaller and lighter materials. This allows use in the area of packaging waste or mixed municipal waste (see Fig. 8 ). The gripping of objects takes place via a suction cup. In sort- ing plants, the Fast Picker can be used as a quality assurance system. The robot is controlled by a software, which uses Artiﬁcial Fig. 6. Scheme of the SELMA sorting system . Fig. 5. Left: Scheme of ZenRobotics ‘‘Heavy Picker”, 1: Sensors, 2: Control unit ZenRobotics Brain, 3: Industrial robot arm, 4: Containers for sorted fracti ons; Right: ZenRobotics ‘‘Smart Gripper” .R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 485 Intelligence for the analysis of the data and control of the function. Through the software, new material data can be constantly acquired and saved in order to further optimize future sorting. The maximum weight of the sortable objects is limited to 1 kg, the maximum dimensions are 400 mm. The vacuum gripper can handle up to 4000 picks per hour . 3.2.3.4. MAX-AI AQc. The company BHS  from Oregon, USA, presented its ﬁrst sorting robot for waste in 2017. Together with the technology company Sadako from Spain and National Recovery Technologies  from Tennessee, a sort- ing robot was developed, which works with Artiﬁcial Intelligence and is used as a quality assurance system. The Max-AI Autonomous Quality Control  robot uses ABB’s delta robot  as the basis . Arti- ﬁcial Intelligence is achieved through Deep Learning, and the sorting process is based on the evaluation of optical data, which is determined solely by VIS-sensors. The installed software is able to recognize recyclables and other objects that can be recycled and to separate up to six different fractions at once . The system is designed in a way that a gripper arm with suction cup is mounted above the conveyor belt and separates the identiﬁed objects from this position into lateral outlets . According to the manufacturer, the MAX AI AQC is able to achieve 65 picks per minute  . The ﬁrst facility of the MAX AI AQC was commissioned in 2017 in Sun Valley, California for the Athens Services Material Recovery Facility. At this site, the robot is used as part of a fully automated PET sorting system. Similarly, a plant in Pennsylvania (Penn Waste), as well as a plant in San Jose, California  use the sorting system for the same task. According to National Recovery Technologies , more than 40 ordersare placed in four continents. The European subsidiary of BHS is based in Amsterdam  . 3.2.3.5. Cortex. In March 2017, the ‘‘Cortex” sorting robot from AMP Robotics with Artiﬁcial Intelligence was presented at a waste treat- ment plant in Denver. The development was performed with the Carton Council of North America and Alpine Waste & Recycling and focused on sorting packaging waste. The Cortex system, which got the nickname ‘‘Clarke”, also uses a delta robot of the company ABB  as a basis . The system works with VIS-sensors and performs the evaluation using Machine Learning. In addition, the system is connected to a database in which all information on detected materials is saved. During sorting, speeds of up to 60 handles per minute  can be achieved . Known waste sorting plants using the Cortex system are located in Denver  and Minnesota, USA. Fig. 9. MAX-AI AQC in operation . Fig. 8. ZenRobotics Fast Picker with focus  on actuator with vacuum gripper . Fig. 7. Left: Gripper of the sorting system, Right: Mobile unit mounted in a container for easy transportation .486 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 3.2.3.6. Sorting systems Bollegraaf. The sorting system RoBB of the Danish company Bollegraaf Recycling Solutions (with Van Dyk Recycling Solutions as a distributor, especially in the USA) was pre- sented at the end of 2013. The system was advertised with the abil- ity to sort different types of plastic and the ‘‘paper, cardboard and cardboard packaging”-fraction from mixed waste streams with a fully automatic robot. The system is equipped with NIR sensors and 3D cameras to create a height proﬁle of the waste stream and to identify the individual materials. The sorting takes place via a vacuum gripper, which is mounted as a portal system above a conveyor belt ( Van Dyk Recycling Solutions, 2013; Waste Management World, 2013 ). Bollegraaf Cogni  was presented in May 2018 at the IFAT in Munich (World’s Leading Trade Fair for Environmental Technologies). The material is detected using the same technology, but the vacuum gripper is mounted on a delta robot arm for the new model . According to the manufacturer, the area of application lies in the sorting of various plastics, Tetra Pak, paper, etc. The design makes it possible to integrate this sys-tem easily into existing systems since the robot arm is positioned over a conveyor belt . 3.2.3.7. Machinex SamurAI. Since 2018, the Canadian manufacturer Machinex has offered a sorting system equipped with Artiﬁcial Intelligence from AMP, which can be used for positive and negative sorting as well. The basis of the ‘‘SamurAI” system is a delta robot with vacuum gripper , which can reach up to 4000 picks per hour. The installed software continuously expands the database in the background with new material data in order toincrease the recognition accuracy. The structure of the sorting sys- tem is modular, which enables an easy extension of the system if necessary. The maximum object mass, which can be moved through the suction pad, according to the manufacturer is 6 kg. In addition, customers can use ‘‘MACH Vision” (in-house pro- duct of manufacturer) to create material identiﬁcation databases in advance for plant-speciﬁc materials, as well as to receive auto- matic software updates and optimized databases from the same systems in other plants via the ‘‘MACH Cloud” (in-house product of manufacturer) installation. Nine plants have already been sold to the US and Canada, where the systems are mainly used to sort plastics . Fig. 11. Bollegraaf Cogni sorting system . Fig. 12. Sorting system Machinex SamurAI . Fig. 10. Cortex sorting system from the company AMP with a suction cup .R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 487 3.2.4. Quality assurance Especially in the ﬁeld of plastics for recycling and production of Solid Recovered Fuels  for thermal utilization, the quality of these processed fractions play an important role and is becoming increasingly important. Speciﬁcally, quality assurance of Solid Recovered Fuels is currently being done primarily by manual and/or through automated sampling and additionally extensive laboratory analyses. Due to the time-delayed results (sometimes up to several days), there is usually no longer a possibility to inﬂu- ence the quality of the fuels, because they are already produced. Through the application of continuous processes of process analy- sis or real-time analytics via different sensor technologies (e.g. NIR-sensors), different parameters in the material ﬂow, such as e.g. contained substances, water content, etc. are measured. By linking measured data with substance-group-speciﬁc propertiesstored in databases (e.g. caloriﬁc value, chlorine, ash content, etc.) or additional data determined by sensor technologies, fuel- relevant parameters of the waste can be measured in real-time and actively inﬂuenced during processing if necessary. Thereby, it is possible to optimise the plant throughput of a production plant or to adapt the produced fuel quality to the qualities required on the market at the time, etc. ( Flamme and Krämer, 2015; Aldrian et al., 2016; Krämer, 2017 ). 3.2.5. Human-Machine-Interface  HMI describes computer-assisted user interfaces that enable the user to communicate with a program. Especially in the area of robotic technology and Internet of Things in combi- nation with HMI, Gautam et al. , Nuamah and Seong  and Thomessen and Kosicki  published peer-reviewed articles. 3.3. Business models The development of new business models and the technological advance go hand in hand – new technologies require innovative business models to be able to compete in the market and new busi- ness models evolve through technical solutions. Amongst others, companies already work on service solutions for reverse logistics of used parts . Through digitalisation, this solution could spread into other areas of waste management. Over the next few years, the waste management industry is forecasting an innovation leap, especially in the areas of digital platforms/dig- ital communication, ‘‘product as a service” and ‘‘predictive maintenance”. 3.3.1. Digital communication As mentioned, in waste management digital platforms have  in recent years to, for example, carry out dis- posal orders or exchange information between customers, produc- ers and service providers. BauTastisch  offers customers information on the purchase and sale of building materials, tools and construction machinery, while Schrott 24  provides information on the possibility of selling scrap metal. Amongst others, digital platforms for the online booking of container sys- tems for the disposal of waste have become established on the Austrian and German waste market. Via the two platforms, WasteBox  and WasteBox Biz  private individuals or construction companies can book waste disposal orders for different types of waste with just a few clicks. The size of the container can be selected and ordered on the homepage. The container is then delivered to the desired loca- tion and picked up again if necessary. Additionally, various waste containers can be easily ordered via Container Online  and Containerdienst 24  . Similar to the Austrian companies WasteBox and WasteBox Biz, the companies Redooo  andRemondis  provide the booking of container systems for pri- vate and commercial customers in Germany via a digital platform. Also, some oversea companies offer online bookings for disposal solutions  in the USA respectively Easy Skip Hire  in Australia). 3.3.2. Predictive maintenance The topic of predictive maintenance describes the ability to pre- dict the remaining service life of machine and plant components through the use of sensors, parameters and data tools. Based on the four pillars of digitalisation – interconnectivity, digital data, automation and direct value creation – optimal maintenance and replacement timings and operating conditions can be identiﬁed based on patterns of critical operating parameters. The combina- tion of service and digitalisation offers tremendous potential as akey innovation because a certain part of the total operating costs of machines and plants are caused during service phases. Hence, this topic not only concerns clients but also EPCs (Engineering, Pro- curement and Construction), machine and plant manufacturers, technology companies, process/measurement/control technicians, etc. Detailed information on the topic of maintenance was pub- lished by the Green Tech Cluster  in the form of a Green Tech Radar. 3.3.3. Product as a service Product as a service describes a concept where selling pure ser- vice or product performance is paramount and selling of actual product moves into the background. This is still not directly rele- vant for waste management sector but for the beneﬁt of better understanding of possibilities and creation of additional aware- ness, examples are offered, amongst others, by the following com- panies and the mentioned services in other sectors: /C15Xerox: Leasing of ofﬁce equipment , /C15Rolls Royce: Service agreement ‘‘Power by the hour” enables the maintenance and repair of engines with ﬁxed prices per opera- tion hour , /C15Philips: The ‘‘pay-per-lux” model provides light as a service and costumers pay for the supplied light output ( Atlas of the future, 2019 ), /C15Michelin: The tyre manufacturer offers ﬂeet management for tyre service  and /C15Hilti: This company provides ﬂeet management for construction machines . 3.4. Data tools The modelling of processes for waste processing is hampered by the heterogeneity of waste. For this reason, development is moving strongly towards multivariate model equations, Deep Learning and Machine Learning. All these models are based on large amounts of data which can be generated and made accessible in different ways. Gu et al.  and Wen et al.  are engaged in the topic of industry 4.0 and big data in waste management. 3.4.1. Blockchain-Technology In 2017, blockchain technology became known mainly through the use of cryptocurrency. The technology is by no means limited to this area of application, but can in principle be used wherever secure data storage has to take place without a central instance. In the ﬁeld of ‘‘green technologies”, the use of blockchain technol- ogy can basically be integrated into the following categories: energy industry, industry & internet of things, smart city and inno- vation engine, payment systems & ﬁntech. Currently, however, the use of blockchain technology focuses primarily on the ﬁnancial sector . As an example, for the use in the energy sector,488 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 a project in New York can be mentioned where electrical energy from photovoltaic systems of residents can be obtained via Block- chain . Experts predict that the technology will also prevail in many other industries and open up new business models . 3.4.2. Statistical design of experiments The statistical design of experiments makes it possible to deter- mine empirical description models for the behaviour of systems with as few attempts as possible. Such models, for example, allow to identify the most important inﬂuencing factors, to make predic- tions about the system behaviour or to determine optimal factor settings. An example of system behaviour hereby can be the power consumption of a machine. Factors are external inﬂuencing factors, such as for example, the speed of a drum screen. In this case, the statistical design of experiments speciﬁes the combinations of factor settings to be investigated for a selected description model so that the system can be described within cer- tain factor limits with minimal effort. Since empirical model equa- tions without theoretical basis are used, the model obtained may, according to Siebertz et al.  only be used for interpolation but not for extrapolation. As an example of such a model, equation formula shows the quadratic description model for nffactors, where ydescribes the system behaviour, the values xrepresent the settings of the factors, and the values care the model constants. y¼c0þXnf i¼1ci;1xiþXnf i¼1ci;2x2 iþXnf/C01 i¼1Xnf j¼iþ1cijxixj ð1Þ An example for the application of the statistical design of exper- iments on the description of waste processes is found in Kazemi et al.  where the inﬂuence of various factors on the compost- ing of municipal waste in investigated. 3.4.3. Building information modelling  BIM technology has become established in many industries in development and production several years ago. In waste manage- ment, BIM is mainly used in the construction industry as a data source for raw materials. Hereby, the focus of BIM lies on the con- sistent use of a digital 3D construction model over its entire life cycle. In the years to come, one can see further development in the four areas of planning, design, component manufacturing and facility management by 2024 . Espe- cially in the ﬁeld of waste management, Bonifazi et al. , Opelt et al.  and Cheng and Ma  dealt with the topic of BIM and published technical papers. Additionally, the Green Tech Cluster  became a publisher of an extensive Radar journal on this subject. 3.4.4. Multivariate analysis The multivariate analysis allows the simultaneous comparison of several  variables or random variables and is used in multivariate statistics. In engineering, for example, these models are used in the chemometric analysis where the most suitable wavelength can be determined using  sensors. Increasingly, this method is applied in the conﬁguration of sensor-based sorters or in the development of material-machine-models where optimal operating points can be determined . 3.4.5. Deep Learning Deep Learning is concerned with a special kind of information processing and uses neuronal nets  as well as large amounts of data to mimic the learning processes and decision-making processes of the human brain. Thus, machi- nes are enabled to improve their skills without human help. Users have the convenience that systems are provided with data andquestions which are independently evaluated. The information obtained this way can be correlated or linked with other data which results in increasingly more connections in the neuronal net that develop in and between single layers. The more neurons or layers the neural network has, or the denser the network becomes, the more complex decisions can be made. In waste management, Deep Learning processes are for example used in the sensory robotic sorting of construction waste. Hereby, the system is trained with examples of the fractions that need to be sorted out and therefore is able to recognize objects of the same structure. 3.5. Market survey As already mentioned at the beginning of this paper, in the course of the project ReWaste4.0 companies from the waste man- agement and disposal sector of the DACH region (Germany, Austria and Switzerland) were interviewed regarding the ﬁeld of waste management 4.0 via an online questionnaire. The survey focused on the following topics: /C15Market needs, trends and requirements for waste management 4.0, /C15Digitalisation and networking of waste management and /C15Need for governance measures. From this, nine speciﬁc questions were formulated that allow both open and closed answers. When formulating the answer options, care was taken to cover all possible cases and to be as non-overlapping as possible. The reason for the rather small num- ber of questions was, on the one hand, the fact that companies want to invest little time in general surveys and on the other hand, there was a desire to achieve a high response rate. Speciﬁcally, the following questions were asked: /C15What company size would you associate your company with? /C15Which opportunities/risks do you generally see in the topic of ‘‘waste management 4.0”? /C15Is your company already involved in the digitalisation in waste management? /C15If so, in which topics? /C15Will you also deal with this topic in the future? /C15What expectations do you have for your company after imple- menting ‘‘waste management 4.0”? /C15Are you planning concrete investments in the ﬁeld of ‘‘waste management 4.0”? /C15Are legal or steering measures currently necessary in the area of ‘‘waste management 4.0”? /C15What does your company speciﬁcally need for the introduction/ implementation of ‘‘waste management 4.0” projects? The survey was carried out from August 24, 2017, until January 16, 2018. In this period 1214 companies visited the online ques- tionnaire via the provided link. Of these, 394 fully answered the questionnaire which corresponds to a relative high overall evalua- tion rate of 32.5%. 18 companies only submitted a partially ﬁlled out questionnaire and 801 used the link to the questionnaire but did not ﬁll it out and therefore could not be included in the evaluation. Basically, by the above-average participation in the survey, it can be stated that the topic of digitalisation in waste management is pressing and that there is great interest from the industry. From the results, it could be ascertained that for the implementation of digitalisation within a company, above all software solutions, qual- iﬁed employees and/or training offers as well as co-operation withR. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 489 the industry are necessary . The sum- mary of the results of the survey are strikingly illustrated in Fig. 13 . 4. Conclusions From the presented scientiﬁc results and market ﬁgures, data, facts and information, it can be seen that, along with other indus- trial sectors, waste management is also inexorably developing towards digital industrialisation. In order to be able to successfully implement the technologies, it is necessary that the systems adapted to customers are coordinated with industrial companies . On the one hand, the qual-ity requirements of the industry (which, among other things, uses secondary raw materials and energy) are becoming even higher; on the other hand, the requirements are becoming increasingly strin- gent from the point of view of environmental legislation. In order to deliver the required material qualities, optimisations in logistics and plant concepts are necessary. The methods of digitalisation will make it possible to achieve these improvements. In addition, new business models based on digital technologies will increas- ingly evolve, contributing to the success of digitalisation along the value chain. Also, from the relatively large participation of the contacted companies in the survey, it can be seen that the topic of digitalisa- tion in the waste management industry is trending and of great interest. According to their own statements, a large part of the companies is already dealing with this topic or is planning to do so in the near future. Currently, especially different digital solu- tions such as electronic invoices, service portals for customers, paperless order processing, container tracking, vehicle tracking and tracking for dispatchers or level measurement in waste con- tainers are in use. Often, different solutions for online waste man- agement are already available, as well as various systems for intelligent waste collection. Summing up, it emerges that intelligent, robotic-based sorting systems in waste management continue to be of increasing interest due, among other things, to the partial replacement of humans or the addition of robots, relieving people of the sometimes heavy physical sorting work and liberating them of a work area with not always optimal environmental for health conditions (noise, dust, dirt, pollutants, etc.). Robots also enable the lifting of heavier objects, which is why pre-shredding gains more importance up to certain sizes. However, there are selected limitations regarding highly efﬁcient application of modern technologies (i.e. in present case robotics technologies) that have to be noted like: /C15Material speciﬁc limitations: complex material distribution, complex and heterogeneous material types in combination with surface contamination, different particle sizes, shapes and sur- face structure of particles, as well as/C15Technology speciﬁc limitations: optimal supply of material ﬂow in machine/plant, detection of material type and position of particle, sensor efﬁciency , particle position changes after detection and prior sorting, actuator (e.g. robot arm) efﬁciency, actuator limitations in its size, velocity, reaction time and number of picks per hour, etc. Furthermore, the automated analysis of waste (material detec- tion) has advanced so far thanks to the use of sensors, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and access to databases that materials can be captured quickly without any problems. Basically, digitalisation in waste management is based on macroeconomic growth. Competition is promoted and labour pro- ductivity increased, which in principle beneﬁts the consumer. Nev- ertheless, it is necessary to set steering and regulatory measures such as, for example, the ﬂexibilisation of employment structures and broadband expansion, but at the same time the further devel- opment of the legal system  and a further training policy geared to the use of ICT. The changes in the industry associated with digitalisation will also change the labour market, as the technologies have great innovation and growth potential. To achieve the recycling targets deﬁned by the European Circu- lar Economy Package several actions from the member states are required to optimize the national waste management towards cir- cular economy. To increase the current recycling rates and reach the demanded rates, robotic technology for waste sorting can be implemented for selected waste materials. To apply this technol- ogy successfully, additional steps e.g. material detection throughsensors, must be taken into consideration, which require datasets with material-speciﬁc information and future research in the area of sensor fusion. Compared to other industries, ‘‘digitalization” is a new topic in the waste management sector and therefore mayor improvements are possible. This is also visible in the development of the market volume for ‘‘green products” and ‘‘circular econ- omy”: in 2013, the global market volume amounted to 2536 billion euros ( €). By 2025, an increase of up to 5385 billion euros  is pre- dicted. Of this, around 100 billion euros  was spent on the circu- lar economy in 2013. This amount will rise to 170 billion euros  by 2025 . Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. Acknowledgements The Center of Competence for Recycling and Recovery of Waste 4.0   under the scope of the COMET – Competence Centers for Excellent Fig. 13. Summary results of the conducted survey .490 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 Technologies – ﬁnancially supported by BMVIT, BMWFW and the federal state of Styria, managed by the FFG. References ABB Robotics, 2019. YuMi - IBR 14000. https://new.abb.com/products/robotics/de/ industrieroboter/yumi . Aldrian, A., Sarc, R., Pomberger, R., Lorber, K.E., Sipple, E.M., 2016. Solid recovered fuels in the cement industry–semi-automated sample preparation unit as a means for facilitated practical application. Waste Manage. Res. J. Int. Solid Wastes Public Clean. Assoc. ISWA 34 , 254–264. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0734242X15622816 . AMP Robotics, 2019. https://www.amprobotics.com/ . Anagnostopoulos, T., Zaslavsky, A., Kolomvatsos, K., Medvedev, A., Amirian, P., Morley, J., Hadjieftymiades, S., 2017. Challenges and opportunities of waste management in IoT-enabled smart cities: a survey. IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput. 2 , 275–289. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSUSC.2017.2691049 . Atlas of the future, 2019. Let there be  light; Pay-per-lux. https:// atlasofthefuture.org/project/pay-per-lux/ . BauTastisch, 2019. https://www.bautastisch.at/ . Berger, R., 2016. Die Digitalisierung in der GreenTech-Branche. Handlungsbedarfe für Unternehmen der Umwelttechnik und Ressourcenefﬁzienz in Deutschland, Im Auftrag des: BUNDESMINISTERIUMS FÜR UMWELT, NATURSCHUTZ, BAU UND REAKTORSICHERHEIT (Digitalisation in the GreenTech industry. Need for action for companies in environmental technology and resource efﬁciency in Germany, On behalf of: Federal Ministry of the Environment, NatureConservation, Construction and Reactor Security). Berger R., Büchele R., 2014. GreenTech made in Germany 4.0; Umwelttechnologie- Atlas für Deutschland, Im Auftrag des: BUNDESMINISTERIUMS FÜR UMWELT, NATURSCHUTZ, BAU UND REAKTORSICHERHEIT (Environmental Technology Atlas for Germany, On behalf of: Federal Ministry of the Environment, NatureConservation, Construction and Reactor Security). BHS, 2019. MAX AI. BHS. http://www.max-ai.com/autonomous-qc/ (last access: 01 march 2019). BHS, 2019. Max-AI /C210AQC Selected for APR Plastics Recycling Showcase. BHS. http:// www.bulkhandlingsystems.com/max-ai-a qc-selected-apr-plastics-recycling- showcase/ . Bigbelly Solar, 2019. http://www.friendly-energy.at/produkte/bigbelly-solar/ bigbelly-solar/ . Binando, 2019. https://binando.com/de . Binder+Co AG, 2019. https://www.binder-co.at/ . Bin-e, 2019. Smart Bin. http://bine.world/ . Bollegraaf Recycling Solutions, 2019. Bollegraaf Cogni. https://www.bollegraaf.com/ technologies/robotic-sorting/bollegraaf-cogni . Bonifazi, G., Capobiano, G., Serranti, S., 2018. Asbestos containing materials detection and classiﬁcation by the use of hyperspectral imaging. J. Hazard. Mater. 344, 981–993. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.11.056 . BT-Wolfgang Binder GmbH, 2019. http://www.btw-binder.com/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Burkowski, M., Lukka, T.J., 02.02.2011. Patent. Robot Hand Mechanism. Burkowski, M., Rehn, R., 15.04.2015. Patent. A Material Sorting Unit, A System And A Method For Sorting Material. Cheng, J.C.P., Ma, L.Y.H., 2013. A BIM-based system for demolition and renovation waste estimation and planning. Waste Manage.  33 , S.1539– S.1551. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2013.01.001 . Container Online, 2019. https://www.containeronline.at/container-mieten/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Containerdienst 24, 2019. https://www.containerdienst24.at/ (last access: 01 march 2019). CoremanNet, 2019. https://www.coremannet.com/ . Curtis, A., Sarc, R., 2018. Deﬁnition of the term ‘‘Smart Waste Factory Network” within the project ReWaste4.0, Montanuniversitaet Leoben on 08 October 2018). Dokulil, E., 2001. Industrieroboter . PC News:58–64. Doppstadt, 2019. Doppstadt Maschinenbau. https://doppstadt.de/ (last access: 01 march 2019). DustBot, 2006. Networked and Cooperating Robot for Urban Hygiene. http:// www.dustbot.org/ . E Cube Labs, 2019. CleanCUBE; The solar powered trash compactor. https://www. ecubelabs.com/solar-powered-trash-compactor/ . Easy Skip Hire, 2019. Skip Hire & Rubbish Removal Service Across Melbourne. https://easyskiphire.com.au/ . ECHORD++, 2012. AAWSBE1 – Adaptive Automated WEEE Sorting 1: Battery Extraction. ECHORD++, 2016. RadioRoSo. http://radioroso.ciirc.cvut.cz (last access: 01 march 2019). ecoATM, 2019. Responsible trade-in that rewards. https://www.ecoatm.com/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Enevo, 2019. https://www.enevo.com/ . ERO, 2019. Betonrecycler. https://www.omerh.co/ . Esmaeilian, B., Wang, B., Lewis, K., Duarte, F., Ratti, C., Behdad, S., 2018. The future of waste management in smart and sustainable cities: a review and concept paper. Waste Manage.  81, S.177–S.195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wasman.2018.09.047 .European Union, 2018. Directive  2018/850 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 1999/31/EC on the landﬁll of waste . European Union, 2018. Directive  2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste . European Commission, 2015. Funded under: H2020-EU.2.1.1.5. Periodic Reporting for period 1 - RoMaNS . https://cordis.europa.eu/result/rcn/198400_en.html (last access: 01 march 2019). Feil, A., Coskun, E., Bosling, M., Kaufeld, S., Pretz, T., 2019. Improvement of the recycling of plastics in lightweight packaging treatment plants by a process control concept. Waste Manage. Res. 37 , 120–126. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0734242X19826372 . Festo, 2019. BionicCobot. https://www.festo.com/group/de/cms/12746.htm (last access: 01 march 2019). Flamme, S., Krämer, P., 2015. Erhöhung der Ressourcenefﬁzienz durch Echtzeitanalytik .Recycling und Rohstoffe, 629–644 . Flamme, S., Hams, S., Zorn, M., 2018. Sensortechnologien in der Kreislaufwirtschaft . In: Pomberger, R., Adam, J., Aldrian, A., Curtis, A., Friedrich, K., Kranzinger, L., Küppers, B., Lorber, K.E., Möllnitz, S., Neuhold, S., Nigl, T., Pfandl, K., Rutrecht, B., Sarc, R., Sattler, T.,Schwarz, T., Sedlazeck, P., Viczek, S., Vollprecht, D., Weißenbach, T., Wellacher, M.,  Recy&DepoTech 2018, Leoben, pp. S 787–792. Gautam, A., Vasu, V., Raju, U., 2014. Human Machine Interface for controlling a robot using image processing. Proc. Eng. 97, 291–298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. proeng.2014.12.252 . Green Creative, 2019. Smart Bin R3D3. http://www.green-creative.com/en/r3d3- sorting-bin . Green Tech Cluster, 2017. Radar Predictive Maintenance. Green Tech Cluster, 2017. Radar Wachsen mit BIM . Green Tech Cluster, 2018. Digitale Abfallwirtschaft - Mehrwert entlang der gesamten Wertschöpfungskette (Digital waste management – added value along the entire value chain). www.greentech.at . Green Tech Cluster, 2018. Green Tech Magazine May. Green Tech Cluster, 2019. Radar Blockchain Technology. https://www.greentech.at/ print/green-tech-radar-blockchain-for-green-tech/ . Gu, F., Ma, B., Guo, J., Summers, P.A., Hall, P., 2017. Internet of things and Big Data as potential solutions to the problems in waste electrical and electronicequipment management: an exploratory study. Waste Manage. (New York, N. Y.) 68, S.434–S.448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.07.037 . Gundupalli, S.P., Hait, S., Thakur, A., 2017a. A review on automated sorting of source-separated municipal solid waste for recycling. Waste Manage. (New York, N.Y.) 60, S.56–S.74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2016.09.015 . Gundupalli, S.P., Hait, S., Thakur, A., 2017b. Multi-material classiﬁcation of dry recyclables from municipal solid waste based on thermal imaging. WasteManage.  70, S.13–S.21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wasman.2017.09.019 . Hannan, M.A., Mamun, M.A.A., Hussain, A., Basri, H., Begum, R.A., 2015. A review on technologies and their usage in solid waste monitoring and management systems: Issues and challenges. Waste Manage.  43, S.509–S.523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2015.05.033 . Heater, B., 2018. Apple has a new iPhone recycling robot named ‘‘Daisy”. https:// techcrunch.com/2018/04/19/apple-has-a-new-iphone-recycling-robot-named- daisy/ . Hilti, 2019. Gerätemanagement. https://www.hilti.at . IFR - International Federation of Robotics, 2018. World Robot Summit, Welcome to the IFR Press Conference 18 October 2018 Tokyo. Kandlbauer, L., 2018. Robotiktechnologie als ein modernes Werkzeug im Smart Waste Factory Network 4.0 (Robotic technology as a modern tool in the Smart Waste Factory Network 4.0). Bachelorarbeit am Lehrstuhl für Abfallverwertungstechnik und Abfallwirtschaft der Montanuniversitaet Leoben , 18.10.2018. Kazemi, K., Zhang, B., Lye, L.M., Cai, Q., Cao, T., 2016. Design of experiment  based screening of factors affecting municipal solid waste  composting. Waste Manage.  58, S.107–S.117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wasman.2016.08.029 . Komatsu, 2019. Autonomous Haul System . https://www.komatsu.com.au/ innovation/autonomous-haulage-system . Krämer, P., 2017. Entwicklung von Berechnungsmodellen zur Ermittlung relevanter Einﬂussgrößen auf die Genauigkeit von Systemen zur nahinfrarotgestützten Echtzeitanalytik von Ersatzbrennstoffen (Development of calculation models to determine relevant factors inﬂuencing the accuracy of systems of near-infrared based real-time analysis of alternative fuels). Dissertation, Aachen. Kujala, J.V., Lukka, T.J., Holopainen, H., 2016. Classifying and Sorting Cluttered Piles of Unknown Objects With Robots: A Learning Approach. KUKA, 2019. Robotersysteme. https://www.kuka.com/de-at (last access: 01 march 2019). Liebherr-International Deutschland GmbH, 2017. Liebherr Presents its Autonomous Haulage Surface Mining Solution, Biberach, Deutschland. Lukka, T.J., Borkowski, M., 31.03.2011. Patent. Sensitive but Durable Tactile Sense. Lukka, T.J., Kujala, J.V., 27.07.2017. Patent. A Method, a Computer Program, an Apparatus and a System for separating at Least One Object from a Plurality of Objects.R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 491 Lukka, T.J., Tossavainen, T., Kujala, J.V., Raiko, T., 2014. ZenRobotics Recycler; Robotic Sorting using Machine Learning. Machinex Industries, 2019. Machinex Industries. https://www.machinexrecycling. com/ . Maggi, F., 2017. Rogue Robots: Testing the Limits of an Industrial Robot’s Security. Trend Labs . Mechsner, G., 2017. Die Digitalisierung der Abfallwirtschaft; Umfrage deckt Unsicherheit bei Entsorgern auf (The digitalisation of waste management; Survey reveals uncertainty among disposal companies). https://www.netwaste. de/blog/waste-5-0/die-digitalisierung-der-abfallwirtschaft-umfrage-deckt- unsicherheit-bei-entsorgern-auf/#more-496 . Mes, M., Schutten, M., Rivera, A.P., 2014. Inventory routing for dynamic waste collection. Waste Manage.  34 , S.1564–S.1576. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.wasman.2014.05.011 . Michelin, 2019. Services and Solutions. https://www.michelin.com (last access: 01 march 2019). Nigl, T., Pomberger, R., 2018. Brandgefährlicher Abfall – Über Risiken und Strategien in der Abfallwirtschaft . Recy & Depo Tech, pp. 85–102 . Nuamah, J., Seong, Y., 2017. Human machine interface in the Internet of Things . In: 2017 12th System of Systems Engineering Conference , Waikoloa, HI, USA, 18.06.2017–21.06.2017. IEEE, pp. S.1–S.6 . OP teknik ab, 2019. http://www.opteknik.se/ . Opelt, A., König, G., Lichtenegger, G., Rauscher, F., Suppan, F., Laske, S., Rinnhofer, A., Jaschik, M., Waltner, G., Bischof, H., 2018. Wertstoffscanner - So motivieren wir BürgerInnen . Recy & Depo Tech, pp. 349–356 . Paben, J., 2017. Latest Robotic Sortation Solution Rolls Out. https://resource- recycling.com/plastics/2017/04/26/latest-robotic-sortation-solution-rolls/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Pellenc, S.T., 2019. http://www.pellencst.com/de/produkte/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Pomberger, R., Küppers, B., 2017. Entwicklungen in der sensorgestützten Sortiertechnik . Montanuniversitaet Leoben . Pomberger, R., Sarc, R., Lorber, K.E., 2017. Dynamic visualisation of municipal waste management performance in the EU using Ternary Diagram method. Waste Manage.  61, S.558–S.571. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wasman.2017.01.018 . Ramos, T.R.P., Morais, C.Sd., Barbosa-Povoa, A.P., 2018. The smart waste collection routing problem: Alternative operational management approaches. Expert Syst. Appl. 103, 146–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.03.001 . Redooo, 2019. https://redooo.de/ . Remondis, 2019. Entsorgungslösung . https://www.remondis- shop.de/ . Robarts S., 2016. Volvo’s Robot Refuse Collectors ROAR into Life. https:// newatlas.com/volvo-robot-based-autonomous-refuse-handling-project-test/42042/ . Rolls Royce, 2019. Power by the Hour Service. https://www.rolls-royce.com (last access: 01 march 2019). Rossi, F., Zhang, R., Pavone, M., 2018. Routing autonomous vehicles in congested transportation networks: structural properties and coordination algorithms.Auton. Rob. 42 , 1427–1442 . Rovetta, A., Xiumin, F., Vicentini, F., Minghua, Z., Giusti, A., Qichang, He, 2009. Early detection and evaluation of waste through sensorized containers for a collection monitoring application. Waste Manage.  29 , S.2939– S.2949. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2009.08.016 . Rubicon, 2019. Affordable Waste Recycling for Smart Business. https://www. rubiconglobal.com/ . Rujanavech, C., Lessard, J., Chandler, S., Shannon, S., Dahmus, J., Guzzo, R., 2016. Liam - An Innovation Story. Sadako Technologies, 2019. http://www.sadako.es/max-ai/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Sandvik, 2019. Automated Loader. https://www.rocktechnology.sandvik/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Sarc, R., Hermann, R., 2018. Unternehmensbefragung zum Thema Abfallwirtschaft 4.0 . In: Pomberger, R., Adam, J., Aldrian, A., Curtis, A., Friedrich, K., Kranzinger, L., Küppers, B., Lorber, K.E., Möllnitz, S., Neuhold, S., Nigl, T., Pfandl, K., Rutrecht, B., Sarc, R., Sattler, T., Schwarz, T., Sedlazeck, P., Viczek, S., Vollprecht, D., Weißenbach, T., Wellacher, M., . Recy&DepoTech 2018, Leoben, pp. S 805–S 812. Sarc, R., Pomberger, R., 2018. Recycling and Recovery of Waste 4.0 - ReWaste4.0. In: Pomberger, R., Adam, J., Aldrian, A., Curtis, A., Friedrich, K., Kranzinger, L., Küppers, B., Lorber, K.E., Möllnitz, S., Neuhold, S., Nigl, T., Pfandl, K., Rutrecht, B.,Sarc, R., Sattler, T., Schwarz, T., Sedlazeck, P., Viczek, S., Vollprecht, D., Weißenbach, T., Wellacher, M., . Recy&DepoTech 2018, Leoben, pp. S 693–S 694. Schrott 24, 2019 . https://www.schrott24.at/ . Shah, P.J., Anagnostopoulos, T., Zaslavsky, A., Behdad, S., 2018. A stochastic optimization framework for planning of waste collection and value recoveryoperations in smart and sustainable cities. Waste Manage. 78, S.104–S.114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.05.019 . Shah, R., Pandey, A.B., 2018. Concept for automated sorting robotic arm. Proc. Manuf. 20, 400–405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2018.02.058 . Side Walk Labs, 2019. https://www.sidewalklabs.com/ . Siebertz, K., van Bebber, D., Hochkirchen, T., 2010. Statistische Versuchsplanung. Design of Experiments . Springer , Heidelberg. Online verfügbar unter http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/docDetail.action?docID= 10391819 . . Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. Siemens, 2018. A Microgrid Grows in Brooklyn. https://www.siemens.com/ innovation/en/home/pictures-of-the-future/energy-and-efﬁciency/smart-grids-and-energy-storage-microgrid-in-brooklyn.html (last access: 01 march 2019). Simple Human, 2019. Sensor Can. https://www.simplehuman.com/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Steinert Elektromagnetbau GmbH, 2019. https://steinertglobal.com/de/ unternehmen/tochtergesellschaften/rtt-steinert/ . Tesla, 2019. Autonomes Fahren. https://www.tesla.com/de_AT/autopilot (last access: 01 march 2019). Thomessen, T., Kosicki, T., 2012. Multimodal human-machine interface for remote operation of robot systems. IFAC Proc. Vol. 45 , 811–815. https://doi.org/ 10.3182/20120905-3-HR-2030.00138 . Tomra Systems GmbH, 2019. https://www.tomra.com/en/sorting (last access: 01 march 2019). Tschandl, M., Peßl, E., Sorko, S., Lenart, K., 2019. Roadmap Industrie 4.0; Roadmap Industrie 4.0 für Unternehmen aus dem Umwelt- bzw. Abfallbereich (‘‘Roadmap industry 4.0 for companies in the environmental and waste management sector”). TÜV Austria Gruppe, Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH, 2016. Sicherheit in der Mensch-Roboter-Kollaboration , TÜV AUSTRIA HOLDING AG, Fraunhofer Austria Research, JOANNEUM RESEARCH. University of Birmingham, 2015. RoMaNS. https://www.h2020romans.eu/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Valpola H., 14.01.2011. Patent. A Method and Apparatur for Determining Different Operating Points in a System. Van Dyk Recycling Solutions, 2013. RoBB. https://vdrs.com/news-media/robb- worlds-ﬁrst-automated-qc-sorter-from-bollegraaf/ (last access: 01 march 2019). Volvo, 2019. Autonomous Trucks. https://www.volvotrucks.com/en-en/about-us/ automation.html . Volvo Germany, 2019. Volvo Construction Equipment enthüllt autonomen Maschinenprototyp (Volvo Construction Equipment unveils autonomous machine prototype). https://www.volvoce.com/deutschland/de-de/about-us/ news/autonome-maschinen/ . VolvoGroup, 2016. The ROAR project - robot and drone in collaboration for autonomous refuse handling. VolvoGroup, 2018. Volvo pioneers autonomous, self-driving refuse truck in the urban environment. Wagland, S.T., Veltre, F., Longhurst, P.J., 2012. Development of an image-based analysis method to determine the physical composition of a mixed waste material. Waste Manage.  32 , S.245–S.248. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.wasman.2011.09.019 . Waste Management World, 2013. Bollegraaf Robotic Recycler Demos at RWM Prior to Commercial Trial. https://waste-management-world.com/a/video-update- bollegraaf-robotic-recycler-demos-at-rwm-prior-to-commercial-trial (last access: 01 march 2019). WasteBox, 2019. https://www.wastebox.at/ . WasteBox Biz, 2019. https://www.wastebox.biz/at/ . Wen, Z., Hu, S., Clercq, D.D., Beck, M.B., Zhang, H., Fei, F., Liu, J., 2018. Design, implementation, and evaluation of an Internet of Things  network system for restaurant food waste management. Waste Manage.  73, 26–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.11.054 . Xerox, 2019. Leasing Beneﬁts. https://www.xerox.com/index/enie.html (last access: 01 march 2019). ZenRobotics, 2019. https://zenrobotics.com/de/ . Zentek, 2019. Trash Button App. https://www.zentek.de/news/trash-button-app- wie-muell-auf-knopfdruck-verschwindet/ .492 R. Sarc et al. / Waste Management 95  476–492 

