A Perspective on a Locally Managed Decentralized Circular Economy for Waste Plastic in DevelopingCountries Chandni Joshi,aJeffrey Seay ,aand Noble Banaddab aCollege of Engineering, University of Kentucky, Paducah KY; jeffrey.seay@uky.edu  bCollege of Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering at Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda Published online 00 Month 2018 in Wiley Online Library . DOI 10.1002/ep.13086 Unsound post-consumer disposal is the primary pathway of plastic into the ecosystem. One way of addressing this problemis through the establishment of a circular economy for plastic. Much of the unsound disposal comes from economically dis- advantaged regions where waste disposal and recycling infra- structure is limited. In economically disadvantaged regions however, the establishment of a circular economy for plasticmust be locally managed and decentralized, meaning that the disposal, collection, remanufacture, and use must all occur within the same community. We suggest that waste plas-tic abatement strategies must be targeted to reduce, reuse, and recycle plastic waste onsite at the local level, initiating a circu- lar economy appropriate for infrastructure limited regions. Technologies for recycling plastic must be low cost, economi- cally viable, socially acceptable, and not adversely impact theenvironment, and also produce a product that has a ready local market. This is critical because unless proposed solutions are also economically viable and socially appropriate, they are unlikely to be successful, especially in underdeveloped regions. Using big data analysis, a metric for identifyingcountries that will have the most potential to bene ﬁt from a locally managed decentralized circular economy for plastic has been developed. The information obtained from this met- ric will help researchers and policy makers promote a locally managed decentralized circular economy of plastic for man-aging the accumulation of waste on land and its eventual migration into waterways. Additionally, we present a case study of a proposed locally managed decentralized waste plas- tic abatement strategy in the municipal solid waste infrastruc- ture limited country of Uganda. © 2018 American Institute of Chemical Engineers Environ Prog, 2018 Keywords: alternate fuels, sustainability INTRODUCTION Plastics are used in every country on earth and none is able to successfully collect and manage 100% of its plastic waste. Once produced, plastic enters the global supply chain and is used in all regions of the world. In fact, our world is generat-ing, consuming, and discarding more plastic than ever, and therates are increasing . The growth rate of plastic productionhas increased at 5% per year worldwide . In 2010, approxi- mately 270 million metric tons  of plastic were produced,with 99.5 million discarded as waste by coastal populations liv-ing within 50 km of the coast . Additionally, it was estimatedthat of the plastic waste generated that year, 31.9 million MTwere mismanaged on land and 4.8 –12.7 million MT entered the oceans . If current trends continue, by 2050, 33 billionMT of plastic are likely to be produced, with approximately12.2 billion MT disposed of as waste, 3.9 billion MT misman-aged on land, and 0.6 –1.6 billion MT eventually entering the oceans . This is a 122-fold increase in a matter of 40 yrs,meaning that global plastic production is increasing exponen-tially. Just between 2015 and 2026, we will make as much plas-tic as has been made since its production began . There are numerous potential resting spots for waste plastic in the ecosystem including disposal in land ﬁlls, recycling, incineration, and unregulated dumping. Disposal on land isthe most common option with previous studies showing thatglobally 60% of plastic municipal solid waste  is dis-carded in open space or in land ﬁlls . A key challenge is that in much of the world, appropriate waste disposal options areunavailable, including properly managed land ﬁlls, leading to waste plastic simply being dumped on open unestablishedplots, accumulating on sides of roadways, and on outskirts ofrural residential areas. This accumulation of plastic waste on land can become a breeding ground for mosquitoes, cause clogged waterways and drainages, and reduce the general aes-thetics of the community . As plastic can take thousands ofyears to decompose, both land ﬁlls and unregulated plots of land will remain unusable long after the dumping ends ,and if not managed properly, chemicals can leach from theplastic into surrounding habitats . Eventually, this plasticwaste will be disposed of in, or migrate to surface waters, gen-erating pollution and threating both terrestrial and marine life.Speci ﬁcally in major bodies of water, plastic waste is ingested by marine life and bird species, resulting in adverse healtheffects, entanglement, and death . Figure 1 shows plastic bags collecting in a drainage canal in Kampala, Uganda, due to unregulated dumping. This is a com-mon problem in many resource-constrained or infrastructurelimited parts of the world, where lack of effective governmen-tal policy, MSW management administration and planning,along with insuf ﬁcient household education, economic pres- sures, limited perspectives on hazards associated with wasteaccumulation, and scarce stakeholder involvement affect how Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online ver- sion of this article. © 2018 American Institute of Chemical Engineers Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep Month 2018 1

waste is disposed or managed . Other factors include growing economies, urbanization, and increased standards ofliving, which led to rapid increases in waste generation indeveloping countries . In rural regions particularly, access to centralized collection and recycling methods are often una- vailable. Consequently, uncontrolled growth coupled with lackof suf ﬁcient infrastructure and regulation in underdeveloped regions of developing countries compounds the waste man-agement problem . Because these factors include eco- nomic and social as well as environmental components, it is critical that proposed solutions include them as well. There-fore, in our view, without considering the three pillars of sus-tainability, MSW management solutions are unlikely to achievelong-term success. A Perspective on a Locally Managed Decentralized Circular Economy Unfortunately, there are currently no globally effective strat- egies to keep waste plastic out of the ecosystem that meet the challenges of both developed and developing countries. This is primarily because waste plastic is not a point-source pollut-ant. As plastic enters the ecosystems from numerous points, it has been a major obstacle for control . Moreover, low- income and low-to-middle income countries lack the resourcesto address this problem. In fact, in addition to lack of waste collection and management infrastructure in underdeveloped regions, researchers have identi ﬁed that simply the lack of convenient waste disposal containers can affect household waste disposal decisions . If people have to walk longdistances to reach a suitable disposal location, they will simply dump the waste nearby on streets, underdeveloped plots of land, or burn it, leading to potentially toxic smoke, especially if plastics are present. This underscores our assertion that locally managed decentralized solutions —targeting waste where it is generated rather than focusing on centralized processing —may be more effective in communities where governmental waste solution efforts are minimal. This type of approach empowers individuals and small communities to adapt and invent solutions rather than waiting on centralauthorities to enact policies and regulations to address the problem. As a result, a locally managed decentralized circular economy of plastic products is generated, encouraging directusers of plastic to consider and bene ﬁt from opportunities of providing waste plastic a value, or by generating new life cycles for plastic products through a cradle-to-cradle approach . We assert that a decentralized circular economy of plastic at the local level can have tremendous bene ﬁts in reducing the accumulation of plastic waste on land and its eventual migra-tion to major bodies of water. An industrial circular economy replaces the produce-consume-discard model by reusing, recy- cling, or reentering products into their manufacturing supply chain on an industrial scale . However, at the local level, especially in rural regions, remanufacturing of plasticproducts, or creating the infrastructure networks to reenter them into their respective supply chains is dif ﬁcult. Traditional solutions, like centralized recycling of plastic waste, are also often impractical in remote regions, or regions lacking well- developed infrastructure due to the transportation costs, mak-ing large-scale recycling operations uneconomical. Hence, a locally managed decentralized circular economy functions to manage waste on small scale in rural regions, without the need of industrial technologies or developed infrastructure. Viable solutions are those that are low cost, can be implemented uti-lizing the region ’s technical knowledge, and most importantly provide an incentive for local people to collect, reuse, and recycle themselves. In many economically disadvantaged regions, an informal local recycling sector exists via a system of waste pickers that sort through dumpsites to collect saleable materials such as metals, plastics, glass, and papers . Often, waste pickers travel throughout communities of rural regions and cit-ies to collect recyclables from house-to-house as well, or set up recycling drop-off locations, paying individuals a small incentive for valuable materials. Afterward, the waste pickers will sort through collected materials, clean, and sell them to recycling companies for a pro ﬁt. These companies then shred and process the materials as desired by manufacturing organi- zations. In this way, rural communities and heavily populated urban centers of developing countries bene ﬁt from a decentra- lized circular economy of recyclable materials, including plastics. However, not all plastics that are recyclable are of value to waste pickers due to a nonexistent recycling market. For instance, polyethylene shopping bags are generated in large Figure 1. Waste plastic and other trash clog a spillway in Kampala, Uganda.  2 Month 2018 Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep volumes globally, but they are recycled in extremely low quantities , accumulating on sides of streets, dumps, and landﬁlls in developing countries. Even in the United States, 380 billion plastic bags are consumed annually, with only 5.2%being recycled . So, unless waste plastic items, such as polyethylene bags can be given a value, they will continue to be unsustainably used and discarded. Therefore, we assert that a locally managed decentralized circular economy with infor- mal recycling playing a vital role in decreasing the accumula-tion of plastic waste is needed. Furthermore, we believe that including social and economic considerations in addition to environmental are critical to successful waste plastic abatementstrategies in underdeveloped regions, which has been lacking in most plastic abatement strategies. In Figure 2, we propose a strategy for establishing a circular economy at the local level by applying the three principles of sustainability to decentralized waste plastic management. Thisstrategy is thermal decomposition of waste plastic to fuel oil at temperatures of 400 /C14C–450/C14C . High-density polyethylene, low-density polyethylene, polystyrene, and polypropylene plas- tics  can be easily converted to fuel similar in compo- sition to diesel and kerosene by individual entrepreneursutilizing appropriate technology , providing a potential path to a locally managed decentralized circular economy. AT is sim- ple nonautomated technology requiring little to no electricity, designed for a speci ﬁcr e g i o nt om e e ts p e c i ﬁc challenges according to available resources . An AT solution for thermaldecomposition of waste plastic is the UKATS Processor . This invention is constructed locally utilizing existent construc- tion materials, available infrast ructure, technical knowledge of intended users, and from easily acquired locally generated plas- tic wastes. For instance, the UKATS Processor is wood ﬁred to allow for the skills of rural communities that operate wood ﬁred cookstoves to be readily applied. Moreover, the desired plastics can be easily collected by waste pickers or entrepreneurs byeither identifying the plastic recycling numbers (2, 4, 5, and 6, respectively) or by performing a simple density test of theshredded plastics in water. That is, if the waste plastics ﬂoat on water, they are suitable for reprocessing to fuel oil. Consequently, a locally managed decentralized circular econ- omy gives waste plastic an econom ic value, which incentivizes people to collect and use it locally, reducing waste accumulation. It further signi ﬁcantly reduces the need for physical and technical infrastructure to implement an industrial circular economy of plastic by involving local community participation as shown in Figure 2. In addition, this approach is socially and environmen-tally appropriate. For instance, as accumulation of waste decreases, sanitation issues decrease, improving community health. Likewise, environmental bene ﬁts are reaped by decreas- ing waste leachate into soil and reducing toxic hazards associated with incineration of plastic waste —a commonly practiced alterna- tive to managing accumulation in rural regions and near slums . The fuel oil itself also d oes not have sulfur dioxide emis- sions as sulfur is not present in the carbon-hydrogen plastic poly-mer chains, reducing greenhouse gas sulfur dioxide emissions in comparison with traditional petroleum derived fuels . Identifying Regions of Greatest Potential for a Locally Managed Decentralized Circular Economy We propose that in order to identify countries that will have the greatest potential for a locally managed decentralized cir-cular economy, the three pillars of sustainability —environmen- tal, economic, and social acceptability —should be incorporated. Hence, waste plastic abatement strategies cannot simply focus on the environment; they must also be economi- cally viable and socially acceptable. We believe that unlesssolutions are targeted to be appropriate for the communities for which they are intended, they will ultimately be unsuccess- ful. To validate this perspective, we developed a simple metric that utilizes a big data approach to analyze countries ’outlook in each of the three pillars of sustainability, highlightingregions where a locally managed decentralized circular econ- omy for plastic is likely to have the highest positive impact. Figure 2. A locally managed decentralized circular economy for waste plastic in infrastructure limited regions. [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com ] Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep Month 2018 3 Today, data availability is better than it has ever been. Gov- ernments, private corporations, and NGOs are collecting ever increasing volumes of data, and much of that data is now pub- licly available and readily accessible via the Internet. This datais useful in conducting sustainability assessments for individual countries and regions. Here, it is organized and analyzed to identify countries which can potentially bene ﬁt from a plastic circular economy at the local level with decentralized waste plastic abatement strategies. The purpose of this metric istherefore to identify countries that have speci ﬁc challenges with any or all three of the pillars of sustainability in meeting their waste management challenges, in return directly affectingthe way plastic waste is handled. Often waste management is a priority in urbanized regions of developing countries, with little attention given to rural regions. Challenges such as variation in income level, conditions of road infrastructure, and perception of communities toward waste,including education regarding hazards associated with waste inﬂuence the way waste is handled in both urban and rural regions. As a result, wealthy communities experience regular waste collection, while slums outside of a city are perceived as dumping grounds for waste. Thus, our approach considers thechallenges facing each country or region, in terms of economic, social, and environmental concerns to propose decentralized waste plastic solutions that are tailored to the region ’s availability of infrastructure, capital, and technical knowledge. Moreover, if community participation is prioritized, engineered AT solutionsare more likely to be accepted, leading to intended uses and beneﬁts, reducing the dependency on central waste collection and management for rural regions, speci ﬁcally. In this metric, a list of 200 countries was analyzed using nine indicators, representing the three pillars of sustainability —eco- nomic, social, and environmental. These indicators are described in Table 1 and were chosen because they identify countries with widespread poverty, underdevelo ped infrastructure, weak gov- ernmental institutions, and an existing MSW management problem —key indicators for determining the suitability of a locally managed decentralized circula r economy. The development of the metric  considers assigning speci ﬁc and globalweighting factors to each of th e nine indicators mentioned in Table 1 to highlight the importance of each indicator and the envi- ronmental, economic, or social outlook of the countries. As a result, a country ’ss p e c i ﬁc and global weighting factors can be individually adjusted to ensure that the country ’s outlook, chal- lenges, and advantages are equally highlighted. Afterward, the sum of indicators and respective weighting factors results in a comparison score of each country ’s viability for a locally managed decentralized circular economy. Further details of this approachare described in the Supplementary Information. X n i¼1GECIEC1*SEC1 ðÞ +IEC2*SEC2 ðÞ ½/C138 +GSCISC1*SSC1 ðÞ +ISC2*SSC2 ðÞ +ISC3*SSC3 ðÞ ½/C138 +GEVIEV1*SEV1 ðÞ +IEV2*SEV2 ðÞ +IEV3*SEV3 ðÞ +IEV4*SEV4 ðÞ ½/C138 ð1Þ where Gis the global weighting factor, Iis the indicator type, Sindicates speci ﬁc weighting factor corresponding to an individual indicator, EC denotes economic, SC denotes social, and EV denotes environmental. This metric can be utilized by researchers, policy makers, and other users to achieve an in-depth understanding of a country ’s waste management outlook, particularly with respect to the economic and social indicators, which are often over- looked. Users can adjust local or global indicator weighting factors according to a region ’s unique challenges or to empha- size a speci ﬁc category that contributes to plastic waste mis- management. Hence, opportunities for managing waste can be identi ﬁed, with a locally managed decentralized circular econ- omy being a viable approach. Utilization of the Metric For the base case, all local and global weighting factors for each of the nine indicators were weighted equally. The results of the big data analysis metric for identifying key regionsTable 1. Indicators used to develop metric for identifying regions most suitable for a consumer-focused decentralized circular economy. Sustainability indicators Units Justi ﬁcation Economic Gross domestic product  Billion USDThis indicator gives a general overview of the wealth of the country, which is directly associated with the availability of developed infrastructure. GDP per capita USDAs GDP alone is not enough to characterize the economic wellbeing of a country ’s population, this indicator was included as well. Environmental Estimated MSW generation MT/dayThis indicator shows the magnitude of the MSW generated in a country. Environmental stress MT MSW/km2This indicator shows the concentration of MSW by including the country ’s land area. Estimated plastic waste in MSW MT/dayThis indicator is speci ﬁc to the key focus of this perspective, which is waste plastic. Estimated unsound waste disposal MT/dayThis indicator provides an overview of the suitability of a locally managed decentralized solution targeted at mismanaged waste. Social Population capitaThis indicator shows how many people can be potentially impacted by proposed perspective and abatement solutions. Population below poverty line %This indicator shows the general wealth of the population and how likely they are to bene ﬁt from entrepreneurial opportunities associated with waste management. Population density capita/km2This indicator relates population to the rate of waste accumulation per land area, identifying hurdles of waste collection as crowdedcountries often have infrastructure challenges. 4 Month 2018 Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep suitable for a locally managed decentralized circular economy are illustrated in Figure 3. Darker colors represent countries that are most likely to bene ﬁt from this approach. It can be observed that sub-Saharan Africa, East Asia, Southeast Asia, and South Asia are the most promising regions for applying decentra- lized solutions to plastic waste management. This informationindicates that typically, developing highly populated low-middle to middle income countries are the most important targets for locally managed decentralized waste plastic abatement strate- gies. The reason being that even though the citizens of these countries generate less waste per capita , the consequence of higher population density results in an overall larger amount of MSW generation than developed regions. Coupled with limited ﬁnancial resources, lack of infrastructure and reliable access toenergy , waste is increasingly susceptible to unsound dis- posal in open dumps, streets, and waterways, especially in rural communities. Contrastingly, developing nations considered by the metric that may consume greater amounts of energy and generate higher amounts of MSW per capita are not ideal loca- tions for a locally managed decentralized circular economy dueto the reasons of improved collection, strong waste management infrastructure, controlled waste disposal, and an existent central- ized, industrial circular economy, leading to reduction in unsound waste disposal. The usefulness of this metric can be additionally demon- strated by weighting one of the three sustainability categories greater than the rest as per the user ’s interests. To illustrate this, the weighting of global sustainability indicators was varied by Figure 3. Suitable regions for a locally managed decentralized circular economy for plastic. [Color ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com ] Table 2. Comparison of 20 countries most suitable for decentralized waste plastic solutions according to different sustainability category weightings. Country suitabilityGlobal indicators weighted equallyEconomic indicator weighted highestSocial indicator weighted highestEnvironmental indicator weighted highest 1 Bangladesh Burundi Bangladesh Bangladesh 2 Burundi Malawi Burundi Pakistan3 Haiti Haiti Nigeria Vietnam 4 Pakistan Rwanda Pakistan Nigeria 5 Malawi Comoros Haiti India 6 Nigeria Togo Malawi Philippines 7 Rwanda Syria Rwanda Sri Lanka8 Syria Bangladesh India Syria 9 Vietnam The Gambia Syria Haiti 10 IndiaCongo, Democratic Republic of the Philippines Guatemala 11 Philippines Yemen Vietnam Burundi12 Guatemala South Sudan Guatemala Malawi 13 Yemen MadagascarCongo, Democratic Republic of the Egypt 14Congo, Democratic Republic of the Pakistan Togo Rwanda 15 Togo Sierra Leone Yemen China 16 Sri Lanka Burkina Faso Ethiopia Yemen 17 Cambodia Cambodia Sri Lanka Cambodia 18 Ethiopia Afghanistan Egypt Thailand 19 Comoros Benin Myanmar/BurmaCongo, Democratic Republic of the 20 Myanmar/Burma Liberia Nepal Myanmar/Burma Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep Month 2018 5 assigning a value of 50% to one, while the other two were set to 25%. This analysis is presented in Table 2 and signi ﬁes that when weighting the global economic indicator higher, countries with relatively low GDP per capita and high percentages of pop- ulation living below the poverty line rise to the top as most suit- able regions. In like manner, for social sustainability, countries with the greatest population numbers or population density are recommended. Meanwhile, estimated plastic waste in MSW 2016 and estimated unsound disposal of plastic waste in MT/day werefound to be the biggest contributing factors for environmental sustainability highlighting regions suffering from uncontrolled waste accumulation. Lastly, the metric also depicts the impact ofenvironmental stress, or the amount of waste generated per km 2 of land. Countries that rank highly in this category include theUnited States, many western European nations as well as high- income Southeast Asian countries, such as Hong Kong, Macao, and Singapore, which have signi ﬁcant environmental stress due to either high generation of MSW, population density, and/or limited land area . As an example, India had the position of being 10th overall in this metric analysis, while being 52nd, 8th, and 5th most suitable country when global economic, social, and environ-mental indicators were respectively highlighted for implemen- tation of a locally managed decentralized circular economy. Therefore, it can be concluded that for India, the lack of waste management education, attitude toward environmental protec- tion, and insuf ﬁcient collection infrastructure combined with increased waste generation due to population density are the most probable causes of plastic waste accumulation, instead of capital constraints. It is also important to note that even thougha circular economy is well established in China, the country currently practices a centralized industrial circular economy . Hence, it could likewise bene ﬁt from a locally man- aged decentralized circular economy approach in rural regions due to high waste generation associated large populations. Although this analysis may appear to simply reinforce well- established beliefs, these results are used to make the point that developing urban and rural regions around the world are different, in return requiring different strategies for MSW and waste plastic abatement. The information obtained from theanalysis suggests that African nations vary in their economic, social, and environmental stance compared with developing regions of Asia. This fact in itself alters the way waste manage- ment is approached in these countries, as cultural norms asso- ciated with perception of waste management vary. Anotherexample is the data highlighting importance of waste recycling in the Americas versus in Europe. Even though both regions are developed, environmentally benign waste management ispracticed in many European nations via a variety of waste-to- energy solutions, while a large portion of waste in the United States goes to the land ﬁll. Hence, the data are used to make the case for designing and developing technologies based on each region ’s outlook, suggesting a locally managed decentra- lized circular economy in rural regions of developing countries. Uganda Case Study The country of Uganda is positioned 32nd in the metric assessment, meaning that it has great potential for a locally managed decentralized circular economy with informal recy- cling waste management approaches. Uganda has a popula-tion of 38.3 million, with a growth rate of 3.22% in 2016 . The size of the country is slightly smaller in area than the U.S. state of Oregon . The nation has abundant natural resources, fertile soil, suf ﬁcient rainfall, and small deposits of precious minerals and oil . Consequently, agriculture andservice sectors employ a combined 78.9% of the population, with coffee revenues accounting for the majority of the exports . Nonetheless, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency reportsthat Uganda is facing economic challenges due to sharp increase in refugees from South Sudan, high energy costs, inadequate transportation and energy infrastructure, insuf ﬁ- cient budgetary discipline, and corruption . Furthermore,during 2015 and 2016, the Uganda shilling depreciated 50% against the U.S. dollar . Moreover, the nation ’s GDP per capita is equivalent to 2100 USD, with 9.4% unemployment rate and 19.7% of the population below poverty line . This along with only 15% of the total population having access toelectricity, and 19.1% population having access to sanitation facilities, has further led to very high risks of major infectious diseases . Despite these challenges, the nation is poised asa good ﬁt for implementation of decentralized waste manage- ment solutions, offering opportunities to recycle plastic waste locally, creating jobs and reducing the spread of diseases due to accumulation of trash. A case study conducted in Uganda at the Kiteezi land ﬁll in the capital city of Kampala reveals some insight on how the proposed metric has been employed for this region. In 2015, the population of Kampala was reported to be approximately 1.9 million, with 70% of the citizens living in informal settle- ments scattered around the city . However, as the coun-try’s capital, it is the home of major markets and a wide assortment of job opportunities which leads to a doubling of the city ’s population during the day , increasing waste gen- eration. Therefore, small-scale decentralized AT solutions to waste management are suggested for this city with both thecommunity ’s and waste pickers ’ participation. Currently, the Kampala Capital City Authority , a governmental solid waste management organization, providescollection and cleanup services to the city ’sﬁve divisions  , contracting collection of waste from afﬂuent areas to private companies . Hence, the af ﬂuent areas are charged a waste collection fee, while the rest of the urban population is serviced by KCCA at no cost . KCCAfurther manages the city ’s 36-acre 25-m tall land ﬁll site at Kiteezi, where both KCCA and private sector waste collection vehicles unload MSW, excluding industrial waste, free of charge . At present, a total of 1300 –1500 MT of MSW per day are land ﬁlled, about half of the total waste generated by the city . This means that the other half is openly dumped in areas inaccessible to waste collection vehicles, including drainage channels, wetlands, natural water courses, manholes, undeveloped plots, or on the roadside . This is a strong indication that consumer involvement and decentra-lized solutions to waste accumulation are needed. The compo- sition of the waste mainly consists of bio-degradable food and garden waste , stones and debris , plastics, paper , glass and metals , textiles , and others  . KCCA spends approximately 13.4 USD/MT for waste collection and disposal services . Waste to energy solutions and organized recycling services are not yet offered by KCCA. Nonetheless, small indepen-dently operated recycling drop-offs exist in the city ’s districts. As these recycling drop-offs are new to the city, each district only has one thus far, handling merely 3 –4 tons of waste per week. Consequently, most of the waste is sent to the Kiteezi landﬁll, where it is informally sorted for recycling by waste pickers. With 500 in number, the organized community of waste pickers who live surrounding the land ﬁll collect any- thing that has a well-developed market, such as construction tarps, plastic bottles, paper, glass, and metals . More specif- ically, the plastic waste that is recycled by the waste pickers ispurchased by domestic and international organizations that pay the pickers 500 UGX/kg. A waste picker typically collects around 40 kg/day of plastic, earning 20,000 UGX/day, which is higher than the average city dweller, who earns around 4,500 UGX/day . However, the waste pickers do not collectsoft plastics  , such as polyethylene shopping bags —known locally as kaveera s—as 6 Month 2018 Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep they do not have a ready recycling market. Furthermore, despite the ban on production of plastic bags in the country, similar to 15 other African nations , lenient governmen- tal enforcement allows for illegal selling of the polyethylenebags . Consequently, the kaveeras are likely to continue to accumulate in the Kiteezi land ﬁll in the coming years unless action is taken. Therefore, we recommend that close-coupled decentralized circular economy of plastic be encouraged via strategies suchas conversion of polyethylene shopping bags and other soft plastics to fuel oil and similar products through AT . This is a viable solution that can further create employmentopportunities. Using the statistics previously mentioned, roughly 49,400 kg of soft plastics are brought to the Kiteezi landﬁll per day. If 40 kg/day of soft plastic waste can be picked by an individual, a resulting 1235 additional jobs could be created at the Kiteezi site. Because the amount of soft plas-tics brought to the land ﬁll are only half of that generated within the city, a similar opportunity exists for local citizens, entrepreneurs, and communities to recycle the waste plastic to fuel, creating additional jobs. The amount of fuel generated could be used as a substitute for kerosene and diesel applica-tions, especially for cooking, lighting, generators, and farming machinery . This establishment of a locally managed decentralized circular economy could potentially have a mon- umental impact on the accumulation of nondegradable soft plastic accumulation at the Kiteezi land ﬁll and in the Kampala city, improving the aesthetics of the region, and providing entrepreneurial and job opportunities, which will eventually bene ﬁt the entire nation . Thus, by employing the perspec- tive metric established in this research, the results of this case study serve as an example for other nations. The metric ’s use of sustainability-focused indicators can assist in identifying a region ’s potential suitability for a locally managed decentra- lized circular economy for waste plastic management. CONCLUSIONS In conclusion, even though all developing countries encounter similar challenges to economic development, waste plastic management practices are likely to vary from region to region, requiring a detailed analysis approach based on the principles of sustainability to determine which nations would most bene ﬁt from a locally managed decentralized circular economy for plastic waste. Often, due to lack of capital resources, centralized waste collection infrastructure, and the population ’s awareness of the consequences of global waste accumulation, rural and developing communities suffer from major sanitation issues and pose serious environmental con-cerns. Thus, it is our view that decentralized or distributed approaches with high levels of local participation be proposed for waste plastic abatement strategies to be successful. Themetric established in this research has been utilized to glean insight for validating this assertion on the importance of including infrastructural, economical, societal, and environ- mental constraints in deciding how waste abatement strategies and resources should be prioritized. Thus, focusing on simplelow-cost technologies, like thermal decomposition, which can be employed at a local level via AT methods, enable the devel- opment of a locally managed decentralized circular econo- mies. This approach promotes community-managed collection and recycle of plastic waste directly where it is generated in asustainable manner. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION Details discussing the generation of the metric presented in this study are outlined in the “Supplementary Information – Metric Generation ”section. An MS Excel Spreadsheet, Joshi & Seay Waste Plastic Data Analysis Metric.xlxs, is also included for data references and to allow users to test the metric accord- ing to their objectives.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Mr. Paul Kiwanuka from the African Institute for Capacity Development  and Mr. Ernest Tibaku from the Makerere UniversityAgricultural Research Institute Kabanyolo . LITERATURE CITED 1. Patni, N., Shah, P., Agarwal, S., & Singhal, P. . Alter- nate strategies for conversion of waste plastic to fuels, ISRN Renewable Energy, 2013, 1 –7.https://doi.org/10. 1155/2013/902053 . 2. Rochman, C., Browne, M.A., Halpern, B.S., Hentschel, B. T., Hoh, E., Karapanagioti, H.K., Rios-Mendoza, L.M., Takada, H., Teh, S., & Thompson, R.C. . Policy: Classify plastic waste as hazardous, Nature, 494, 169 –171. 3. Wilcox, C., Sebille, E.V., & Hardesty, B.D. . Threat of plastic pollution to seabirds is global, pervasive, and increasing, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- ences of the United States of America, 112, 11899 –11904. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1502108112 . 4. Li, W.C., Tse, H.F., & Fok, L. . Plastic waste in the marine environment: A review of sources, occurrence and effects, Science of the Total Environment, 566 –567, 333–349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016. 05.084 . 5. Geyer, R., Jambeck, J., & Law, K.L. . Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made, Science Advances, 3, e1700782. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782 . 6. Jambeck, J.R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T.R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, R., & Law, K.L. . Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean, Sci-ence, 347, 768 –771. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 1260352 . 7. Sarker, M. . Converting waste plastic to hydrocarbon fuel materials, Energy Engineering, 108, 35 –43.https:// doi.org/10.1080/01998595.2011.10389018 . 8. Sarker, M., Mamunor Rashid, M., Sadikur Rahman, M., & Molla, M. . Production of valuable heavy hydrocar- bon fuel oil by thermal degradation process of post-consumer municipal polystyrene  waste plastic in steel reactor, Energy and Power, 2, 89 –95.https://doi.org/10. 5923/j.ep.20120205.02 . 9. Jayasiri, H.B., Purushothaman, C.S., & Vennila, A. . Quantitative analysis of plastic debris on recreational bea-ches in Mumbai, India, Marine Pollution Bulletin, 77, 107–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2013. 10.024 . 10. Barnes, D.F.K., Galgani, F., Thompson, R.C., & Barlaz, M. . Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debrisin global environments, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 1985 –1998. https://doi.org/10.1098/ rstb.2008.0205 . 11. Barnes, D.K., Walters, A., & Goncalves, L. . Macro- plastics at sea around Antarctica, Marine Environmental Research, 70, 250 –252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. marenvres.2010.05.006 . 12. Troschinetz, A.M., & Mihelcic, J.R. . Sustainable recy- cling of municipal solid waste in developing countries, Waste Management, 29, 915 –923. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.wasman.2008.04.016 . 13. Sujauddin, M., Huda, M.S., & Ra ﬁqul Hoque, A.T.M. . Household solid waste characteristics and manage-ment in Chittagong, Bangladesh, Waste Management, 28, 1688–1695. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2007. 06.013 . 14. Minghua, Z., Xiumin, F., Rovetta, A., Qichang, H., Vicentini, F., Bingkai, L., Giusti, A., & Yi, L. . Munici-pal solid waste management in Pudong New Area, China, Waste Management, 29, 1227 –1233. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.wasman.2008.07.016 . Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep Month 2018 7 15. Moghadam, M.R.A., Mokhtarani, N., & Mokhtarani, B. . Municipal solid waste management in Rasht City, Iran, Waste Management, 29, 485 –489. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.wasman.2008.02.029 . 16. Kalanatarifard, A., & Yang, G.S. . Identi ﬁcation of the municipal solid waste characteristics and potential of plastic recovery at Bakri Land ﬁll, Muar, Malaysia, Journal of Sustainable Development, 5, 11 –17.https://doi.org/10. 5539/jsd.v5n7p11 . 17. Seng, B., Kaneko, H., Hirayama, K., & Katayama- Hirayama, K. . Municipal solid waste management in Phnom Penh, capital city of Cambodia, Waste Manage-ment & Research, 29, 491 –500. https://doi.org/10. 1177/0734242X10380994 . 18. Mrayyan, B., & Hamdi, M.R. . Management approaches to integrated solid waste in industrialized zones in Jordan: A case of Zarqa City, Waste Management, 26,195–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2005.06.008 . 19. Tadesse, T., Ruijs, A., & Hagos, F. . Household waste disposal in Mekelle city, Northern Ethiopia, Waste Management, 28, 2003 –2012. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wasman.2007.08.015 . 20. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. . Circular economy over- view. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. https://www. ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/ circular-economy/overview/ concept 21. Parker, L. . Planet or Plastic? National Geographic, 2018, 40 –91. 22. Yuan, Z., Bi, J., & Moriguichi, Y. . The circular econ- omy: A new development strategy in China, Journal ofIndustrial Ecology, 10, 4 –8. https://doi.org/10. 1162/108819806775545321 . 23. Geng, Y., Zhu, Q., Doberstein, B., & Fujita, T. . Implementing China ’s circular economy concept at the regional level: A review of progress in Dalian, China,Waste Management, 29, 996 –1002. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.wasman.2008.06.036 . 24. Mathews, J.A., Tan, H., & Hu, M.C. . Moving to a cir- cular economy in China: Transforming industrial parks into eco-industrial parks, California Management Review, 60,157–181. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125617752692 . 25. Preston, F. . A global redesign? Shaping the circular economy, London: Chatham House. 26. Preston, F., & Lenhe, J. . A wider circle? The circular economy of developing countries. Chatham House TheRoyal Institute of International Affairs. 27. Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N.M.P., & Hultink, E.J. . The circular economy –A new sustain- ability paradigm? Journal of Cleaner Production, 143, 757–768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048 . 28. Kaur, G., Uisan, K., Ong, K.L., & Ki Lin, C.S. . Recent trends in green and sustainable chemistry & waste valori- sation: Rethinking plastics in a circular economy, CurrentOpinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry, 9, 30 –39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsc.2017.11.003 . 29. Medina, M. . The informal recycling sector in devel- oping countries: Organizing waste pickers to enhance their impact. Gridlines, Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility. , Washington DC: World Bank. 30. Medina, M. . Waste picker cooperatives in develop- ing countries. Membership Based Organizations of the Poor. , Routledge. 31. Rathi, S. . Optimization model for integrated munici- pal solid waste management in Mumbai, India, Environ- ment and Development Economics, 12, 105 –121. https:// doi.org/10.1017/S1355770X0600341X . 32. Bari, Q.H., Hassan, K.M., & Haque, M.E. . Solid waste recycling in Rajshahi city of Bangladesh, Waste Man-agement, 32, 2029 –2036. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wasman.2012.05.036 .33. Fergutz, O., Dias, S., & Mitlin, D. . Developing urban waste management in Brazil with waste picker organiza- tions, Environment and Urbanization, 23, 597 –608. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247811418742 . 34. Joshi, C., & Seay, J. . An appropriate technology based solution to convert waste plastic into fuel oil in underdeveloped regions, Journal of Sustainable Develop- ment, 9, 133. https://doi.org/10.5539/jsd.v9n4p133 . 35. DeNeve, D., Joshi, C., Samdani, A., Higgins, J., & Seay, J. . Optimization of an appropriate technology based process for converting waste plastic in to liquid fuel via thermal decomposition, Journal of Sustainable Develop-ment, 10, 116. https://doi.org/10.5539/jsd.v10n2p116 . 36. Santaweesuk, C., & Janyalertadun, A. . The produc- tion of fuel oil by conventional slow pyrolysis using plastic waste from a municipal land ﬁll, International Journal of Environment and Sustainable Development, 8, 168 –173. https://doi.org/10.18178/ijesd.2017.8.3.941 . 37. Patil, L., Varma, A.K., Singh, G., & Mondal, P. . Ther- mocatalytic degradation of high density polyethylene into liquid product, Journal of Polymers and the Environment, 26, 1920 –1929. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-017-1088-0 . 38. Singh, R.K., & Ruj, B. . Time and temperature depended fuel gas generation from pyrolysis f real world municipal plastic waste, Fuel, 174, 164 –171. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.fuel.2016.01.049 . 39. Demirbas, A. . Pyrolysis of municipal plastic wastes for recovery of gasoline-range hydrocarbons, Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 72, 97 –102. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jaap.2004.03.001 . 40. Pinto, F., Costa, P., Gulyurtlu, I., & Cabrita, I. . Pyrolysis of plastic wastes. 1. Effect of plastic waste composition on product yield, Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 51, 39 –55.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-237000007-8 . 41. Al-Salem, S.M., Lettieri, P., & Baeyens, J. . Recycling and recovery routes of plastic solid waste : A review, Waste Management, 29, 2625 –2643. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.wasman.2009.06.004 . 42. Kumar, S., & Singh, R.K. . Recovery of hydrocarbon liq- uid from waste high density polyethylene by thermal pyroly-sis, Brazilian Journal of Chemical Engineering, 28, 659 –667. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0104-66322011000400011 . 43. Miskolczi, N., Bartha L., Deák G., Jóver B., 2004. Thermal degradation of municipal plastic waste for production of fuel-like hydrocarbons. Polymer Degradation and Stability 86, 357 –66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab . 2004.04.025 44. Panda, A.K., Singh, R.K., & Mishra, D.K. . Thermoly- sis of waste plastics to liquid fuel. A suitable method for plastic waste management and manufacture of value added products —A world prospective, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 14, 233 –248. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.rser.2009.07.005 . 45. Wong, S.I., Ngadi, N., Abdullah, T.A.T., & Inuwa, I.M. . Current state and future prospects of plastic waste as source of fuel: A review, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 50, 1167 –1180. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.rser.2015.04.063 . 46. Central Intelligence Agency. . The world factbook, ﬁeld listing: Population. https://www.cia.gov/library/ publications/the-world-factbook/ ﬁelds/2119.html 47. Central Intelligence Agency. . The world factbook, ﬁeld listing: Area. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the- world-factbook/ ﬁelds/2147.html 48. Central Intelligence Agency. . The world factbook, Africa: Uganda. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/ the-world-factbook/geos/ug.html 49. Serukka, D. . Waste management in Kampala: Strat- egies for improvement. Report presented to Kampala Capi- tal City Authority. 8 Month 2018 Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep 50. Komakech, A.J., Banadda, N.E., Kinobe, J.R., Kasisira, L., Sundberg, C., Gebresenbet, G., & Vinnerås, B. . Characterization of municipal waste in Kampala, Uganda, Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 64,340–348. 51. Plastic waste is choking Kampala city, 2015. New Vision. http://www.newvision.co.ug/new_vision/news/1324822/ plastic-waste-chocking-kampala-city 52. Whitaker, M. . Why Uganda hates the plastic bag, Uganda: BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/ programmes/from_our_own_correspondent/6253564.stm .53. Uganda High Court rules in favor of plastic bag ban, 2012. Environment News Service. http://ens-newswire. com/2012/11/12/uganda-high-court-rules-in-favor-of- plastic-bag-ban/ 54. Iwuoha, J. P. . Plastic sho pping bags will soon be history everywhere in Africa. Here ’sw h y …Huffpost. http://www. hufﬁngtonpost.com/johnpaul-iwuoha/plastic-shopping- bags-wil_b_10277978.html 55. Barigaba, J. . Uganda: Makers of plastic bags get reprieve. The East African. http://allafrica.com/ stories/201703300406.html Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy DOI 10.1002/ep Month 2018 9 

