Comparing European countries' performances in the transition towards the Circular Economy Alfonso Marino, Paolo Pariso ⁎ University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli ”–Engineering Department, Via Roma 29, 81031 Aversa, CE, Italy HIGHLIGHTS •Assesses the transition degree of the 28EU Member States towards the circu-lar economy •Comparing the CE state of art in Europe •Measures the performances of the coun- tries in the 3R activities for the transi- tion towards the CE •Evaluates the correlation between the GDP and the strategic elements identi- ﬁed by EU as barriers towards the transition.GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT abstract article info Article history: Received 13 November 2019Received in revised form 5 March 2020Accepted 21 March 2020Available online 21 April 2020 Keywords:Cross national comparative studyCircular EconomyEuropeGrowth Domestic Product3R actionsThe aim of the present research is to compare the performances of the 28 EU Member States in the period 2006 –2016 in order to assess their progress towards the achievement of circular economy objectives. This study overviews the conceptual background, that informed the implemented measures so as to create an accu-mulation of knowledge which focuses on the one hand on “Reduction, Reuse, Recycling ”actions, and on the other hand on the main impact areas of circular economy activities. Furthermore, the evaluation of these actions and their impacts were carried out correlating Growth Domestic Products in Purchasing Power Standards datawith quantitative indicators: Produced Municipal Waste –PMW, Produced Food Waste –PFW, Municipal Waste Recycling rate –MWRr, Domestic Material Consumption - DMC, Production Material Reuse rate –PMRr, Market rate of Recyclable Raw Materials –MrRRM. These indicators allow assessing the degree of transition achieved by the member states in the implementation of circular economy. The analysis shows that differentstrategies were adopted by the 28 EU Member States and that only a few of these could be considered effective in meeting the challenges of the circular economy in European Union. © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Since the industrial revolution our industrial economy has been dominated by a “take make and dispose ”pattern of production andconsumption in which products are made using raw materials, pur- chased, used and at the end of their life cycle is land ﬁlled ( Murray et al., 2017 ). This model has ﬁnally reached a point of no return, creating an imbalance between resource supply and goods demand. In fact, this model neglected nature's regeneration rate which cannot keep up with the resource consumption rate. This is one of the main problems of the linear model . In fact, if current levels ofScience of the Total Environment 729  138142 ⁎Corresponding author. E-mail address: paolo.pariso@unicampania.it . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138142 0048-9697/© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Science of the Total Environment journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv production and consumption continue at this rate and in this manner, it will not be possible to sustain development and preserve the planet for future generations . The strategic need for an alternative model of growth emerged in terms of the debate about the circular economy , described as an economy with closed material loops. Over the last decade the CE, also due to the challenges posed by of the Circular Economy Action Plan, CE issues have attracted a great dealof attention. The efforts made by the Member States to shift their social and economic activities towards “circularity ”have fostered changes in the business model and labor market, with new business models and new opportunities resulting from the implementation of the Reduction, Reused and Recycling  actions able to create four million new jobs, to generate €147 billion in value added and promote €17.5 billion worth of investments . Furthermore, the recycling of municipal waste and the percentage of recycled material reuse  increased during the last ten years. Despite this, the recycled materials do not even reach the 12% of the EU materials demand, and, a full circularity is applied to only 9% of the world economy, which indicates that there are still wide margins for improvement . This idea of CE considers it as a transformative economy rede ﬁning produc- tion and consumption patterns, inspired by ecosystems principles and restorative by design, which increases resilience, eliminates waste and creates shared value through an enhanced circulation of material and immaterial ﬂows . This concept highlights the key factors of the paradigm: resources ef ﬁciency, sustainable economic growth, environmental protection and social development. Following Hislop and Hill  :“The circular economy represents a develop- ment strategy that maximizes resource ef ﬁciency and minimizes waste pro- duction, within the context of sustainable economic and social development ”. With the reference to social-economic aspects, for Preston  “A circular economy is an approach that would trans- form the function of resources in the economy. Waste from factories would become a valuable input to another process –and products could be repaired, reused or upgraded instead of thrown away ”. Despite the differ- ent emphases, perspectives and approaches these de ﬁnitions evolve around the central idea that the CE is a 3R system with mainly environ- mental, economic and social impacts. Many studies analyzed the issues from a theoretical point of view. Kirchherr et al.  elaborated a comparison analysis with 114 CE de ﬁnitions, Ghisellini et al.  per- formed an ample review on CE issues at micro, meso and macro level. More recently, Korhonen et al.  analyzed the emergent literature from several ﬁelds to identify concepts and account for the complexity of the issues and the perspectives of different contributions. However, only a few authors focused on the operative application at macro level  for an extended geographical area (i.e. Europe), and followed a quantitative approach as well. This paper in- tends to contribute in bridging this gap. Firstly, the relevant knowledge is gathered and organized so as to rank the 28EU member states accord- ing to their performances in terms of their transition towards the CE. In particular, the indicators, relating to environmental (Produced Munici- pal Waste, Produced Food Waste, Municipal waste recycling rate), eco- nomic (Domestic Material Consumption, Market rate of recyclable raw materials, Production Material Reuse rate), and socio-economic  vari- ables, are used to assess outcomes and highlight good practices, so as to identify which of these are more likely to be conducive to a CE as envisioned by the EU. In order to assess the degree of transition towards the CE, we also evaluated GDP in PPS and the ratio of GDP/CEI correlat- ing this information with the quantitative indicators. The performances of the 28EU Member State was analyzed in the period 2006 –2016. The study was developed, ﬁrstly carrying out a performance analysis of each Member State in terms of the implementation of CE activities and the progress made towards the achievement of EU circular objec- tives. The accumulation of knowledge and application of quantitative indicators, should allow for the design of a CE achievement process.The present analysis will be of interest for researchers, policy makers and government planners, who can acquire information for the devel- opment of CE strategies in long term plans. The paper is organized as follow: sections two outlines a conceptual background on the CE will be developed. Moreover, Section 3 shows the state of art of the European context, Section 4 explains the elaborated methodology, and Section 5 displays the results and related discussion. Finally, Section 6 shows the conclusions of the paper. 2. Conceptual background The literature and the EU directive and recommendations indicate that most of the issues concerning the CE transition evolve around waste, its production, its reuse and its disposal. In fact, the waste man- agement is considered by European Commission  in overall 28EU Member States a strategic issue to address the transition from lin- ear to circular economy. Liu et al.  focused on the sustainable waste management under the concepts of the CE through “Reduce, Reuse and Recycle ” rules. They underlined the need for an ade- quate legal framework and highlighted the importance of investing both in technologies for the ef ﬁcient resource recycling and waste man- agement infrastructures. Furthermore, Iacovidou et al.  pre- sented an innovative approach “Complex Value Optimisation for Resource ” that seeks to assess how complex value is created, destroyed and distributed in resource recovery from waste systems. In addition, in line with the Waste Framework Directive ( European Parlia- ment, 2018 ) the municipal waste is a complex bottleneck in waste man- agement because even if it does not represent the main part of the total waste generated in the European Union , it is amongst the most complex ones to manage ( Malinauskaite et al., 2017 ). In particular, according to OECD  the municipal waste is deﬁned as the household waste and waste similar in nature and compo- sition to household waste. Its mixed and dispersed nature typically makes it dif ﬁcult to treat . Amongst these kinds of wastes, food waste is potentially the largest un-tapped re-cyclable component of the municipal waste stream. Food waste accord- ing to Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nation ( FAO, 2011 ) refers to the decrease in the quantity or quality of food resulting from decisions and actions by retailers, food service providers and con- sumers. It represents a growing problem in our society with almost 88 million tons of waste were generated every year. In particular, this implies that valuable and often scarce resources such as water, soil, and energy are being lost, and that climate change is being affected. At worldwide level, only 6.3% of food waste is diverted towards land ﬁlls and incinerators for composting. It represents 22% of discarded munici- pal waste . In addition, as acknowledged by the Waste Framework Directive , sets a target of 50% of municipal waste to be recycled and prepared for reuse by 2020 in EU Member States. The Directive identi ﬁes the recycling actions  as a strategic drivers and strengths of the CE policy in Europe. Minelgait ė and Liobikien ė focused on the importance of reducing, reusing, and recycling behaviors as effective tools for solving the waste problem in the European Union, and pointed out that the countries seeking to minimize waste generation should also pay more attention to the pro- motion of ef ﬁcient consumption and production patterns. Despite their importance, these actions alone do not ensure the transition to- wards a total circularity. Winkler, 2011  reinforces this concept, identifying two structural barriers to the improvement the circularity in terms of product reuse. The ﬁrst barrier is that a large part of the used materials is still accumulated as in-use stocks, and the second is that a large amount of unrecycled materials is sent to land ﬁll. Reusing used materials as raw materials  is another strate- gic cornerstone. Considering that the rates for some materials are al- ready high, considerable improvements still seem possible ( Iacovidou et al., 2017a ;Horodytska et al., 2018 ;Hahladakis and Iacovidou,2 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 2019 ). In fact, by preferring the use of recycled materials to the raw ma- terials, it is possible to in ﬂuence the performance of companies both in relation with their production processes, by making them less energy- intensive and more resource ef ﬁcient, and also to their market compet- itiveness. In fact, the 3Rs strategy is a manufacturing strategy which is also driven by market conditions . Ac- cording to the European Commission's Circular Economy package the increase in secondary raw material use will open new markets, reduce costs of production, increase busi- nesses competitiveness, encourage new product development, create jobs, promote innovation and thus stimulate economic growth. In order to assess the degree of transition towards CE, quantitative indica- tors can be useful . However, they need to be correlated into well devised sets to account for their combined ef- fects and the intricacies of the system's dynamics. Finally, data interpre- tation should be contextualized to evaluate impacts in each member state. In fact, Elia, et al.  with reference to the methodologies and indicators used for an Environmental Agency report , pointed out that no single indicator, characteristic or methodology can prove to be adequate to in the interpretation of such a complex phe- nomenon. Moreover, Iacovidou et al.  , in the context of the mea- surement of resource recovery from waste, showed that the proposed methods alone were not able to assess the retention of value in waste resources. The CE is a composite objective and therefore a single indica- tor does not explain the complexity of a whole transition process. Such a process needs to be investigated bearing in mind the impact of eco- nomic variables such as GDP in PPS in each country in order to under- stand their potential correlation with quantitative indicators ( Awasthi et al., 2018 ). From our research perspective it is essential to outline the European context and analyze the performance of each Member State. 3. European context In order to investigate CE awareness in the European context, it is necessary to understand how the countries are implementing and should implement actions to boost the transition towards the CE. Thirty ﬁve ofﬁcial reports were issued: European Commission (2015a, 2015b, 2016a, 2016b, 2016c, 2016d, 2017a, 2017b, 2017c, 2018a, 2018b,2018c, 2018d, 2019a, 2019b, 2019c, 2019d) ,European Parliament  ,European Environment Agency (2013, 2018) ,Eurostat  ,European Invest- ment Bank  ,European Circular Economy Stakeholder Platform  ,European Economic Area  ,OECD  , United Nation Environment  . Their common denominator was to accelerate the transition of European countries to the CE. We elabo- rated this information and devised a synoptic framework to outline the progress made so far and to identify possibilities and opportunities for improvement. 3.1. Austria Austria shows a high CE pro ﬁle mainly focused on environmental in- novation . In fact, the country is ori- ented towards a growing improvement of municipal waste recycling and towards the promotion of initiatives supporting the transition (i.e. RepaNet). Despite this, an effective Austrian Circular Economy Strategyshould include objectives aimed at reducing raw material use and waste production, because the country is amongst the highest waste pro- ducers. The country's National CE plan is focused on this topic and envi- ronmental concerns but neglects the economic opportunities that can be offered by the CE. Sustaining SMEs and taking advantage by the fact that the service sector represents 63% of national GDP in the transi- tion towards the CE could be further strategic actions to implement.3.2. Belgium Belgium devised a general framework supporting the CE. In fact, in this country many initiatives in improving the transition have been de- veloped. Subsides in support of reduction of land ﬁll, incineration taxes aimed at minimizing household waste and waste amongst SMEs, invest- ments in great infrastructure for separate collection, are only some ac-tions that highlight the coordinated governmental actions in this direction. Despite this, Belgium still faces issues such as high operational costs of selective waste collection and low environmental taxation. 3.3. Bulgaria Bulgaria presents a weak position in the CE implementation. On the one hand the country has a low per capita waste production but on the other hand there are many dif ﬁculties in the waste reduction of SMEs and especially in the lack of funding available for enterprises. Efforts should be made to minimize the raw material use and waste production and to introduce tax incentives in support of new CE investments. The European Commission has recommended that all economic actors should foster 3R actions in their activities and safeguard prevention practices in waste management. 3.4. Croatia Croatia presents a pro ﬁle with a low per capita waste production but shows criticalities in the recycling of municipal waste, in fact the coun- try is at risk of not meeting the European recycling targets. The national CE plan is mainly focused on waste management and on sustainable tourism. The country should gear its efforts towards raising awareness of CE transition policies and promoting tax incentives. The European Commission has strongly recommended that both the private and the public sectors should implement 3R actions in their activities and en- sure prevention practices in waste management to optimize recycling, incineration and land ﬁll use. 3.5. Cyprus Cyprus is a country with below average in terms of per capita waste production. In fact, it is one of the greatest waste producers of the 28EU Member States. Its national CE plan is mainly focused on renewable en- ergy . The country has greatly invested in latest frame- work program  in resource usage ef ﬁciency, and energy network infrastructures. Its particular geographical collocation does not allow for innovative investments by the multinationals and this ishindering the development in terms of technological innovation. Cyprus should enact 3R policies aimed at the reduction of material raw use, municipal waste and plastics production and at investing in re- search and innovation in order to boost the transition. 3.6. Czech Republic The Czech Republic has been quite active in pursuing the transition towards the CE with a good pro ﬁle in the packaging waste recycling . In addition, the country which re- ceived substantial EU funding, mainly concentrated on improving envi- ronmentally friendly innovative technologies and activating campaigns to raise the awareness of the population in the reduction of plastic use. In addition, the country is making efforts to deal with the issue of waste packaging. These include enacting proper legislation. Several initiatives have been undertaken such as the national Waste Management Plan 2015 –2024 in which the CE has a leading role in the long term planning . One of the main problems is given by the mu- nicipal waste management due to the presence of a great number of landﬁlls. Furthermore, the country has been slow in the implementation of EU regulations on waste management and plastics. SMEs should be3 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 supported with the introduction of tax incentives in CE activities. The European Commission has recommended that the public and private sector should improve 3R actions in their activities and ensure preven- tion practices in waste management. 3.7. Denmark Denmark has been active in promoting the transition towards the CE since the beginning. The country has leader pro ﬁle in household waste management and the reduction of land ﬁlls. At the same time, the coun- try is one of the highest per capita producers of municipal waste and does not show a great capacity to minimize the waste produced by the SMEs. Many initiatives have been implemented such as the Danish Strategy for Circular Economy to boost the transition through the eco- nomic support to activities aimed at re-circulating materials and reduc- ing the waste and enhancing the environmental innovation. The country should work harder at coordinating actions at the national level with actions at the local level in order to avoid different ap- proaches at municipal level which do not penalize private companies that do not ensure the EU waste hierarchy. In addition, the transition could be facilitated by introducing tax incentives for repair services, re-circulation of goods and transactions with clearly de ﬁned social objectives. 3.8. Estonia Estonia is a country with a great propension towards the transition, in fact the country produces little per capita waste and has promoted many actions aimed at reusing materials. It has a good system of deposit-refund for beverage packaging that allows to collect almost the entire quantity of this kind of waste. Additionally, several other measures have been developed in different contexts to boost the transi- tion. In fact, it is the ﬁrst country in which a University  established an institute for teaching speci ﬁc skills to sustain the transition towards CE . Furthermore, the country has been able to create effective national networks between all the stakeholders, private and public, involved in the CE system, in order to share information and promote constructive dialogues aimedat creating a national CE strategy (i.e. the Circular Economy Forum, the Estonian Association for Environmental Management, and the Min- istry of Environmental Affairs). However, Estonia shows several critical- ities in the transition policy with a low resource ef ﬁciency, a low ability of national SMEs in waste reduction practices, and an inef ﬁcient system of municipal waste and packaging recycling . 3.9. Finland Finland is one of the European leaders in the CE transition. The country planned a strong national ﬁnancing system to sustain the in- novation in the CE , created a national program for the recycling of nutrients , developed several projects for plastic reduction and CE  and organized the World Circular Economy Forum conference. The latter was able to encourage the adoption of several best practices and to establish transition guidelines. The transi tion process has also been aided by the national community's general awareness of the opportunities that the CE could bring about for both traditional enterprises and new emerging businesses. At the same time, also the government has adopted some incentive tax in the recycling and reuse activities. Additional efforts should be made to enhance eco-innovation espe- cially in the harmonization of its legislative framework with the European Parliament's criteria for sustainable forestry and the safe- guard of biological cycle.3.10. France The country's CE transition yielded some improvements in the re- duction of waste production and the increase of its recycling. The coun- try published a national CE roadmap  with effective objectives in support of the transition thanks to the collaboration between Ministry for an Ecological, the Inclusive Transition and Ministry for the Economyand Finance and the Institut National de l'Économie Circulaire . In addition, France planned an effective legal framework to encourage of 3R activities. It also imposed legal sanctions for non-compliance with the collection, recycling and packaging rules . It increased taxes on waste burials in land ﬁlls and reduced taxes on recycling oper- ations. Further incentives have been granted for social enterprises that collect and sell used goods, through the exemption of the VAT. However, the SMEs require further support. A national program should be set up to encourage circular design training so as to reduce the use of raw ma- terials and waste production and enhance reuse, repair and sharing practices. 3.11. Germany Germany shows a very advanced pro ﬁle in the transition towards the CE with a good management of municipal system of municipal waste recycling. The country carried out several well-coordinated CE initiatives with a good coordination at national level aimed at achieving resource ef ﬁciency and recycling targets. It promoted incentives for reuse and the design for recycling (i.e. ﬁscal incentives, favorable legis- lative framework). In order to encourage recycling actions, it introduceda new Packaging Act which includes a National Packaging Registry. The strengths of the German CE plan can be found in the strong national pol- icy and the awareness and the receptivity of the population towards the sustainability issues. On the other hand, the country presents a very high per capita waste production that represents the main problem in this context. 3.12. Greece The country's performance is particularly poor both in the private and in the public sector. The main weaknesses that can be identi ﬁed in the 3R actions are mostly due to the dif ﬁculties in overcoming the barriers created by the linear economy and therefore the slow response in adopting the EU Commission's proposals. Efforts have been made to promote new legislation and to allocate funds for educational and orga- nizational purposes. The aim of these measures was on the one hand, to enhance knowledge on CE and, on the other hand, to improve gover- nance structures by establishing a speci ﬁc operative organization with the task of supporting the transition. It is interesting to note that these recent efforts are in line with European Commission's suggestions but are clearly inadequate to promote a transition from linear to circulareconomy. The European Commission has strongly recommended that both the private and the public sectors should promote 3R actions in their activities and ensure prevention practices in waste management; implement the National Action Plan on Circular Economy; promote transparency laws and regulations; simplify administrative procedures; implement a Circular Procurement. 3.13. Hungary The transition from linear to circular economy in this Member State has been slow and intermittent. Barriers include a lack of widespread resource-ef ﬁcient and strategic thinking that could facilitate the transi- tion. The barriers are present both in the public and the private sector. In the private sector, the SMEs and big companies are strongly anchored to a linear economy. In the agricultural and the public sector no effective plans or actions were implemented to support the transition. The European Commission underlined the importance of undertaking4 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 actions: to implement a Hungarian Circular Economy Roadmap, to re- duce raw materials use and waste production, to increase reuse, repair and sharing , to protect the environment, and foster domestic eco- nomic growth. 3.14. Ireland The Member State created a strong re-use and repair network and devised several government support programs. However, the effects have been more signi ﬁcant in the public than in the private sector. In fact, SMEs and big companies have not ﬁnd a way to improve the ef ﬁ- ciency of the 3R strategy. The European Commission underlines the im- portance of the implementation of a Green Deal Circular Procurement and the enhancement of an Irish Circular Economy Roadmap. 3.15. Italy Italy's performance has been more positive in the private in terms of SMEs transition towards a CE. In the public sector the implementation of 3R strategy has been proven to be much more dif ﬁcult at all levels of government. On several occasions the European Commission pointed out that the policy the policies enacted were not meeting the set objec- tives by established deadlines. The European Commission underlines the importance to implement a Green Deal Circular Procurement. 3.16. Latvia Latvia's CE performance is quite poor, the main bottlenecks concern waste in terms of management. The primary main problems to separate non collection and sorting of materials and the creation of economic value. There is also little stakeholders' awareness of the need for the transition. European Commission recommendations are linked to the 3R strategy and its implementation. Particularly the suggestions con- cern the use of EU ﬁnancing also to improve waste management infra- structure with common rules at national and local level. In addition, the application of Green Deal on Circular Procurement for both public and private sector, and include a free training program. 3.17. Lithuania Lithuania has done well in private sector. SMEs and big companies implemented strategic actions linked to the end market and environ- mental concerns to support the transition. Instead, the experience ofpublic sector is quite different. In this sector, much more is to be done. In this sector, a lack of policy measures to promote the transition and the low level of government involvement at national and local level, continues to hinder CE efforts. The European Commission recommenda- tions concern the following actions: change investment cash ﬂow in in- cineration capacity, introduce taxes on land ﬁll; implement the EU regulations on waste management and plastics  in the next two years. Furthermore, the EU Commission advised to apply for additional EU funds to set-up a national support program for public economic growth with focused activities that will support the creation of a CE hub. 3.18. Luxembourg Luxembourg has done well in several areas concerning the CE, par- ticularly in the private and the public sector. CE systemic actions were focused at the public level in communication with the stakeholders to foster better understanding of the transition from linear to circular economy. In terms of material and immaterial environmental develop- ment and domestic economic growth. The private sector in terms of SMEs and big companies has reached interesting outcomes linked to the 3R strategy. Nevertheless that, the European Commission recom- mendations suggested the following systemic actions: the launch of a Green Deal Circular Procurement for both the public and the privatesector, including a training program; the reduction of raw materials use and waste production; the creation of a public CE hub. 3.19. Malta Malta's extremely slow progress, mainly due to multiple natural bar- riers such as: a strong dependence on external energy sources; lack of natural resources; delay in the innovation process in private sector. The European Commission recommendations advised to undertake the following systemic actions: implementation of the EU regulations on waste management and plastics  in the next two years and the launch of a Green Deal on Circular Procurement for both the public and the private sector, and a free training program. 3.20. Netherlands This Member State is at the forefront of the CE in Europe. The sys- temic actions and initiatives that it carried out consolidated its leader- ship role in the transition. The Netherlands created a multitude of roadmaps plans and formative strategies, both private and public sector, and involved all stakeholders in the transition. Despite that, the European Commission recommended the establishment of a long term budget for the CE to be sustained with domestic resources, the pro- motion of cross sectoral collaboration, and the creation of new circular value chains. 3.21. Poland Poland is a Member State in which the CE concentration is low. The reasons can be found ﬁrstly, in the unresponsiveness of the public sector to the transition. In addition, the agricultural and manufacturing sectors show serious technological gaps. The European Commission's recom- mendations are linked to the following actions: implementation of the Polish CE roadmap, reduction of raw materials use and waste produc- tion , resource optimization and the achievement of full circularity in the next ten years. 3.22. Portugal Portugal has shown a strong awareness in public sector with circular agenda linked to the reduction and reuse of material that support the service delivery. It is interesting to note that the same agenda was also applied to immaterial resources such as software reuse in public admin-istrations. Unfortunately, the strengths shown in the public sector are not found in the private sector. In the private sector, SMEs and big com- panies, are improved their performance but, many criticalities persist. The local waste recycling and material reuse practices are particularly inefﬁcient in private sector. The 3R strategy in private sector is very weak. The European Commission, particularly recommended the fol- lowing short term actions: the intensi ﬁcation of measures to protect the environment and the creation of a legislative framework to ensure compliance. These actions may be strategic to support the economic growth of local companies and facilitate the transition from linear to cir- cular economy. 3.23. Romania Romania is struggling to achieve better CE performance. This coun- try is lagging behind the other Member States in both private and public sectors at the national and local level. This delay concerning both, in na- tional and local level. Most measures were partial and uncoordinated. The improvements should be linked to the 3R approach, such as: the de- velopment of new products from reused or recycled materials and, reus- able products. The speci ﬁc recommendations of the EU Commission for the private and for the public sector include actions related to environ- ment and the creation of a legislative framework.5 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 3.24. Slovakia Despite the increasing efforts, Slovakia has achieved negligible tran- sition results. The management of municipal waste is particularly inef ﬁ- cient also due to the delay in implementation of CE principles. In order to speed up the transition towards a CE, the European Commission rec- ommended to launch a Green Deal Circular Procurement for both thepublic and the private sector, initiate a free training programs and en- sure compliance with EU regulations on waste management and plas- tics, in the next two years. In this sense, lower per capita municipal waste production  is a strategic objective that must be met, both, public and private sector. These outcomes are strategic in order to sup- port the transition from linear to circular economy. 3.25. Slovenia Slovenia has initiated numerous initiatives aimed at achieving circularity but many have been successful. This is mainly due to the lack of improvements in waste management and a production sys- tem that is still ﬁrmly anchored to the linear economy. The European Commission recommendations underlined the strategic importance to realize a Green Deal on Circular Procurement for both the public and the private sector, including a free training pro- gram. The EU Commission advised the reduction of raw materials use and of waste production. On the other hand, the country should make more efforts to foster secondary raw material use , and to establish an appropriate materials accounting system so as to achieve the circularity objectives in ten years in compliance with EU recommendations. 3.26. Spain Spain is doing relatively well in terms of CE both, in the private and public sector. Spain is making solid progress in the private sector with reference to the SMEs and big companies. The reuse process is advanc- ing in terms of employment development and resources ef ﬁciency. De- spite that, a few areas are in need of attention: the recycling of municipal waste which needs to be increased and the stakeholdersshould become more involved. In this framework, the recommenda- tions of European Commission included the implementation of the new EU regulations on waste management and plastics in the next two years. In addition, the Spanish Circular Economy Roadmap should be enhanced and raw materials use and waste production should be reduced.3.27. Sweden In the Sweden there is an impressive implementation of CE. Many strategies have employed to realize the CE objectives. Particularly, in private sector, SMEs and big companies have adopted behaviors to quickly achieve the goals set by the national government and Europe. It is interesting to note that, this attitude it is not re ﬂected in the public sector, in fact, speci ﬁc objectives have been reached but a systemic change of public administration, at local and central level, is not yet come. Examples of good practices in private sector are the low VAT rate and income tax reduction for certain repairs. Following the European Commission recommendations, these actions could create a general ambition to change the logic from linear to circular. 3.28. United Kingdom Although there is no national CE strategy in the United Kingdom , several environmental protection plans have been implemented. Some of their objectives such the reduction of carbon emission and the minimization of waste that converge towards a CE. These objectives are actively pursued at regional level. Despite these local actions, there are not general ambitions at national level to reach the CE targets. The European Commission advised to launch a Green Deal Circular Procure- ment for both the public and the private sector, and to optimize the waste and plastics management systems by two years. (This analysis was carried out when the UK was yet one of the 28EU Member States.) The comparison of the 35 of ﬁcial reports reveals that the 28 Member States show marked differences in the transition results achieved both in terms of the economic sector, private or public, that has driven the change and in terms of extent and degree of transition in each State. Criticalities that hinder the transition have emerged both at macroeco- nomic level in terms of national government choices and at microeco- nomic level connected to speci ﬁc sectors and services. In the private sector most problems are connected to the dif ﬁculties experienced by the big companies and SMEs in complying with the mid-term objectives set by the EU which mostly concern reduction, re-use, and recycling ac- tivities of materials in all economic sectors. As to the public sector be- sides the above mentioned 3R problems, the main bottleneck concerns the achievement of the national transition objectives. This problem is addressed by EU recommendations that suggest an intensi ﬁ- cation of macroeconomic actions such as Roadmap, Green deal and Cir- cular procurement implementation. These actions depend on: −the wealth production capacity of each country ; −how of this wealth is correlated to purchasing trends ; −the quantity of GDP that is invested in CE, for example “ patents ”. 0%1%2%3%4%5%6%7% Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croa/g415a Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden United KingdomMunicipal waste  Fig. 1. Produced Municipal Waste .6 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 For the transition at the microeconomic level  the emphasis is on the strategic role of and the need for the enhancement of 3R activities which represent a bottleneck in 16 out of total of 28 mem- ber states i.e. the majority. Having gathered the qualitative date we set out to analyze how the performances of the 28 compare in terms of the criticalities and the weaknesses that we identi ﬁed. 4. Methodology The assessment of these criticalities and weaknesses was carried out using six indicators : Produced Municipal Waste PMW  Produced Food Waste PFW  Municipal Waste Recycling rate MWRr .Domestic material consumption DMC Production Material Reuse rate PMRr  Market rate of Recyclable Raw Materials MrRRM (expressed in percentage). PMW displays the amount of waste produced by ﬁnal consumers. This includes households waste and other kinds of waste similar in na- ture and composition to household waste. PFW shows the quantity of waste that derives from the food supply chain connected to all activitiesthat produce, process, distribute and consume food ( Møller et al., 2014 ; European Parliament, 2018 ). MWRr detects how much of the waste produced by the ﬁnal consumers is recycled and therefore contributes to the circularity of the process. Such an indicator yields useful informa- tion about the organizational quality of the waste management systems. According to the Economy-wide Material Flow Accounts ( Eurostat, 2010 ), DMC is de ﬁned as the total amount of material directly used in an economy and equals direct material input (i.e. domestic extraction plus imports) minus exports. According to the Circular Material Reuse Rate methodology , the PMRr detects how much of the recovered material is reintroduced into the economy, and therefore supports the change towards the circularity. MrRRM, elaborated on In- ternational Trade in Goods Statistics  published by Eurostat  , measures the percentage of traded goods produced using recycled raw materials. GDP per capita is expressed in Purchasing Power Standards  in which the volume index is correlated to the European Union average which is set as equal to 100. Values higher than 100 show that the country's level of GDP per capita is higher than the EU average and vice versa. PPS can be considered as a sort of common currency that eliminates the differences in price levels between countries therefore al-lows for meaningful volume comparisons of GDP between countries . Circular Economy Investments  include the tangible goods with a useful life of more than one year, persons employed as a percentage of total employment and gross income from operating activities in the recycling, repair and reuse sector ( Eurostat, 2019a, 2019b, 2019c, 2019d, 2019e ). The data Eurostat on ﬁlled patents consist of innovative ideas related to recycling and secondary raw 0.00%1.00%2.00%3.00%4.00%5.00%6.00%7.00%8.00%9.00% Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croa/g415a Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden United KingdomMunicipal recycling rate Fig. 3. Municipal Waste Recycling rate .0.00%2.00%4.00%6.00%8.00%10.00%12.00% Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croa/g415a Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden United KingdomFood waste  Fig. 2. Produced Food Waste .7 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 materials and in particular technologies classi ﬁed in the following codes in the Cooperative Patent Classi ﬁcation : solid waste manage- ment; reuse, recycling or recovery; wastewater treatment; potential or indirect contribution to greenhouse gas emissions mitigation. Imple- mented Best Practices  refer to successful “virtuous ”activities im- plemented to meet CE objectives . These quantitative indicators were obtained by integrating the data set, in- cluded in the Circular Economy indicator , with the analyzed of ﬁcial reports. The data is referred to the decade 2006 –2016 a n d European Parliament  ,b e c a u s eb e f o r e 2006 the of ﬁcial data available were incomplete and partial. This ap- proach becomes fundamental in view of the sharing of such techniques or methods in the development of CE transition. 5. Results and discussion Table 1 outlines that the average share of investment, for the period 2006 –2016 and for all countries, is equal to 0,096%. Considering this av- erage value, 16 countries, out of total of 28, are above the average and 12 are under such an average. The standard deviation with the reference to above average group ranges between a minimum value of 0,006%, displayed by Finland, and a maximum value of 0,059% of displayed by the Netherlands. The standard deviation of the under average group ranges between a minimum value of −0,004  and a maximum value of −0,090 . Column four  shows the av- erage value of GDP per capita in PPS during the decade 2006 –2016 andthat 12 countries exhibit values that are higher than the EU average. Re- sults are reported in Table 1 . The 28 EU member states are ranked with respect to each quantita- tive indicators. The results are shown in Figs. 1 –6. Data suggest that there is a direct correlation between the values of PMW and the GDP per capita of the countries. In fact, those with higher GDP per capita averages show high values in PMW (Netherlands GDP 136 PMW 3,90%; Ireland GDP 148 PMW 4,23%; Austria GDP 130 PMW 4,23%; Finland GDP 116 PMW 3,78%; United Kingdom GDP 109 PMW 3,63%; Italy GDP 102 PMW 3,73%). This would entail that the countries' waste management systems is strictly correlated to waste production. The values of MWRr, reveal another correlation with GDP per capita of the countries. In fact, the upper-middle- and high-income countries re- cycle more waste (Netherlands GDP 136 MWRr 5,37%; Austria GDP 130 MWRr 6,37%; United Kingdom GDP 109 MWRr 4,14; Italy GDP 102 MWRr 4,35; France GDP 108 MWRr 4,18%; Sweden GDP 126 MWRr 4,23%; Belgium GDP 120 MWRr 4,42%; Denmark GDP 128 MWRr 7,26%; Germany GDP 123 MWRr 8,06%). These countries are endowed with a closed loop waste management system. In fact, they collect andrecycle almost all types of waste (i.e. plastic, paper, cardboard, metal, and glass). The PFW con ﬁrms the above mentioned correlation (Nether- land GDP 136 PFW 10,96%; Belgium GDP 120 PFW 6,99%; United Kingdom GDP 109 PFW 4,78%; Ireland GDP 148 PFW 4,38%; Sweden GDP 126 PFW 4,30%; Austria GDP 130 PFW 4,24%, Finland GDP 116 PFW 3,83). However, it also shows that amongst the high quantity waste producers, there are different levels of income. This, in turn, 0%5%10%15%20%25%30% Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croa/g415a Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden United KingdomMaterial reuse rate Fig. 5. Production Material Reuse rate .0.00%1.00%2.00%3.00%4.00%5.00%6.00%7.00%8.00% Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croa/g415a Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden United KingdomDomes/g415c Material Consumpr/g415on Fig. 4. Domestic Material Consumption .8 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 indicates different pattern of consumption. In fact, amongst ﬁrst ten food waste producers there are also three countries belonging to the lower - medium income group (Cyprus GDP 94 PFW 6,63%; Estonia GDP 73 PFW 5,37%; Poland GDP 65 PFW 5,01%), whereas countries be- longing the higher income group are not included in the ﬁrst ten food waste producers (Italy GDP 102 PFW, Luxembourg GDP 264 PFW 3,55%, Germany GDP 123 PFW 3,02%, Denmark GDP 128 PFW 2,96%, France GDP 108 PFW 2,76%). This is also con ﬁrmed by the different waste composition and the GDP per capita values correlation as re- ported by Eurostat  . In fact, in line with the high-income coun- tries generate in percentage less food waste  but more dry waste which is easier to recycle . By con- trast the middle - and low-income countries generate more food waste which amounts to the 53% of total waste. This percentage varies according to the level of a country's economic development whereby less economically developed countries produce more food waste. The DMC shows exceptions to the material consumption patterns. In fact, despite material consumption should increase when the GDP per capitaof the countries increases, in the case of UK, Netherlands, France, Italy, and Belgium the opposite happens (United Kingdom GDP 109 DMC 9,72%, Netherlands GDP 136 DMC 11,06%, France GDP 108 DMC 12,41%, Italy GDP 102 DMC 10,00%, Belgium GDP 120 DMC 14,82). This can be explained by considering that above mentioned countries optimized their production processes so as to use more second raw ma- terial as a consequence demand for raw materials. Another interesting feature is represented by 5 low GDP per capita countries (Czech Republic, Poland, Bulgaria, Romania, and Estonia). These countries are amongst the less industrialized in the EU and so enjoy grater margin of economic growth and receive more EU funds. Consequents consump- tion levels are more likely to grow (Czech Republic GDP 86 DMC 16,63%; Poland GDP 65 DMC 17,24%; Bulgaria GDP 46 DMC 18,37%; Romania GDP 54 DMC 19,10%; Estonia GDP 73 DMC 26,69%). Another interesting correlation can be identi ﬁed between GDP per capita in PPS, PMRr and MrRRM. In fact, it can be observed that higher GDP per capita countries use and trade more products made from second raw materials (France GDP 108 PMRr 18% MrRRM 0,24%; UK GDP 109 PMRr 15% MrRRM Table 1 GDP per capita in PPS and ratio GDP/CEI. Country name Country codeArea Average value 2006 –2016 GDP per capita in PPSAverage annual GDP 2006 –2016 ML€Average CE investments 2006 –2016 ML€Ratio GDP/CEI Austria AUT G1 130 €309.224 3,50 € 0,113% Belgium BEL G1 120 €374.967 2,80 € 0,075% Bulgaria BGR G4 46 €39.363 0,50 € 0,127% Croatia HRV G4 61 €44.472 0,60 € 0,135% Cyprus CYP G3 94 €18.307 0,10 € 0,055% Czech Republic CZE G4 86 €155.469 0,10 € 0,006% Denmark DNK G2 128 €249.636 2,30 € 0,092% Estonia EST G4 73 €17.236 0,20 € 0,116% Finland FIN G2 116 €195.310 2,00 € 0,102% France FRA G3 108 €2.047.106 21,30 € 0,104% Germany DEU G1 123 €2.715.249 28,70 € 0,106% Greece GRC G3 79 €205.484 0,60 € 0,029% Hungary HUN G4 66 €102.336 0,90 € 0,088% Ireland IRL G2 148 €196.714 0,20 € 0,010% Italy ITA G3 102 €1.613.556 17,80 € 0,110% Latvia LVA G4 61 €21.655 0,20 € 0,092% Lithuania LTU G4 69 €32.041 0,40 € 0,125% Luxembourg LUX G1 264 €43.126 0,20 € 0,046% Malta MLT G3 87 €7.244 0,10 € 0,138% Netherland NOR G1 136 €335.596 5,20 € 0,155% Poland POL G4 65 €368.814 4,70 € 0,127% Portugal PRT G3 79 €175.088 1,40 € 0,080% Romania ROU G4 54 €137.309 1,10 € 0,080% Slovakia SVK G4 75 €70.165 0,60 € 0,086% Slovenia SVN G4 85 €36.591 0,50 € 0,137% Spain ESP G3 95 €1.065.259 11,00 € 0,103% Sweden SWE G2 126 €393.094 4,10 € 0,104% United Kingdom GBR G2 109 €2.107.470 31,00 € 0,147%0.00%0.20%0.40%0.60%0.80%1.00%1.20% Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croa/g415a Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden United KingdomShare of goods traded that are recyclable raw  materials Fig. 6. Market rate of Recyclable Raw Materials .9 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 0,35%; Luxembourg GDP 264 PMRr 11% MrRRM 0,97%; Germany GDP 123 PMRr 11% MrRRM 0,25; Denmark GDP 128 PMRr 10% MrRRM 0,31%; Austria GDP 130 PMRr 9% MrRRM 0,32%). The data con ﬁrm this trend with the presence of six out of total of twelve countries with the highest values of GDP per capita. An additional useful element for the assessment of the degree of transition is the analysis of GDP/CEI ratio with PrCE and IBP because it favors the comprehension of the operative transition level achieved by each country . The data analysis of this relation highlights a scenario which con- ﬁrms the positive correlation trend between the higher GDP/CEI aver- age countries and those with high performance in PrCE (Austria GDP/ CEI PrCE 3,21% - IBP 3,75%, Finland GDP/CEI PrCE 2,92% - IBP 5,00%, France PrCE GDP/CEI 14,24% - IBP 8,75%, Germany GDP/CEI PrCE 33,11% - IBP 8,75%, Italy GDP/CEI PrCE 7,72% - IBP 15,42%, Netherlands GDP/CEI PrCE 4,44% - IBP 12,08%, Spain GDP/CEI PrCE 5,52% - IBP 12,08%, United Kingdom GDP/CEI PrCE 7,67% - IBP 5,00%). In this con- text, the data of PrCE are in line with the data of MWRr highlighting countries' pro ﬁles in which there are more investments in CE that result in a greater number of innovative technologies that may in ﬂuence their recycling and reuse actions by activating CE processes. To con ﬁrm this trend, the data of IBP show that within best ten performers of thisrate, there are six shared countries with PrCE (Italy, Netherlands Spain, Germany, France UK). This feature highlights the strong in ﬂuence of the economic structures on countries' initiatives that result in best practices. The analysis identi ﬁes areas ‘proﬁles deeply different ’. In fact, G1 and G2 represent the areas that drive, support and operate the transition to- wards the CE. In the G3 area only France and Italy show behaviors in linewith the main part of the G1 and G2 countries. The data highlight that the countries with a leader pro ﬁle are all included amongst the coun- tries with a higher GDP in PPS and GDP/CEI ratio average values, conﬁrming a correlation between these economic elements with the transition degree of the countries towards the CE. The G4 area, with six countries out of total of eleven countries, shows a high degree of in- vestment propension, due to the strong commitment of the EU in terms of huge investments towards the EU incoming countries. Despite this, these countries do not reach signi ﬁcant transition outcomes in relation with the investments made. Finally, the G4 countries display a low level of PrCE and IBP by highlighting a dif ﬁculty in strategic investments. 6. Conclusions The paper presented a comparison analysis on the CE transition in the 28EU Member States. Starting from a conceptual background and operational overview, the study describes the state of art of the phe- nomenon. Moreover, six quantitative indicators (PWM, PFW, DMC, MWRr, PMRr, MrRRM) have been elaborated in order to investigate the transition degree of each country towards the CE. The analysisshows a heterogeneous transition with countries in which the presence of higher GDP in PPS and GDP/CEI ratio average values show a good ca- pacity of recycling  and reuse . An interesting feature, by analyzing the European geographical areas, is represented by the fact that G1 and G2 areas are composed by leader countries in transition. These performances are highlighted also at operative level by the ranking in PrCE and IBP. 0.00%2.00%4.00%6.00%8.00%10.00%12.00%14.00%16.00%18.00% Croa/g415a Cyprus Estonia Latvia Malta Bulgaria Lithuania Poland Czech Republic Hungary Slovakia Denmark Greece Ireland Portugal Romania Slovenia Luxembourg Austria Sweden Finland United Kingdom France Germany Belgium Spain Netherlands ItalyBest Prac/g415ces Fig. 8. Implemented Best Practices .010020030040050060070080090010001100120013001400 Malta Estonia Croa/g415a Cyprus Greece Slovenia Bulgaria Slovakia Latvia Lithuania Portugal Luxembourg Romania Hungary Ireland Sweden Denmark Czech Republic Belgium Finland Austria Netherlands Spain United Kingdom Italy Poland France GermanyPatents related to circular economy  Fig. 7. Patents related to Circular Economy .10 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 In conclusion, it can be observed that in order to reduce the gap within the 28 EU Member States, it is necessary to develop ambitious government actions to support the best possible transition in each country. This necessitates a strong economic structure, a willingness of the governments in term of policies, an entrepreneurial culture on the territory able to understand the economic opportunities behind this change, and a population awareness and receptivity able to see in thistransition an opportunity to enhance its social context and wellbeing. The CE is an open question, and therefore in conclusion the output of discussion linked to research results, reject a stance whereby the transi- tion must be seen as under constant development and re-interpretation. Declaration of competing interest The authors of this manuscript certify that they have No af ﬁliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any ﬁnancial in- terest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in speakers' bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrange- ments), or non- ﬁnancial interest (such as personal or professional rela- tionships, af ﬁliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. References Awasthi, A.K., Cucchiella, F., D'Adamo, I., Li, J., Rosa, P., Terzi, S., ... Zeng, X., 2018. Modelling the correlations of e-waste quantity with economic increase. Science of the Total En- vironment 613, 46 –53. Brissaud, D., Zwolinski, P., 2017. The scienti ﬁc challenges for a sustainable consumption and production scenario: the circular reuse of materials for the upgrading and repurposing of components. Procedia CIRP 61, 663 –666. EASAC, 2016. Indicators for a Circular Economy. European Academies ’Science Advisory Council, Halle. EEA, 2013. Municipal waste management in Italy. https://www.eea.europa.eu/publica- tions/managing-municipal-solid-waste/italy-municipal-wastemanagement . Elia, V., Gnoni, M. G., & Tornese, F., 2017. Measuring circular economy strategies through index methods: A critical analysis. Journal of Cleaner Production 142, 2741 –2751. European Circular Economy Stakeholder Platform, 2018. Luxembourg's Climate Pact now also mainstreams circular economy in local policy. https://circulareconomy.europa. eu/platform/en/good-practices/luxembourgs-climate-pact-now-alsomainstreams- circular-economy-local-policy . European Circular Economy Stakeholder Platform , 2019. http://cdlink2.eesc.eu- ropa.eu/m/1/76282871/p1-b19044be4818fc7c414b6d89b98905a6051293/1/13/ 3fd2b728-b1bf-4419-b7f9-540ad21ef56c . European Commission, 2015a. Closing the Loop: An Action Plan for the Circular Economy. European Commission, Brussels https://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri%C2% BCcellar:8a8ef5e8-99a0-11e5-b3b7-01aa75ed71a1.0012.02/DOC_1&amp;format% C2%BCPDF , Accessed date: 10 February 2020. European Commission, 2015b. Towards a circular economy. https://ec.europa.eu/com- mission/priorities/jobs-growth-and-investment/towards-circular-economy_en . European Commission, 2016a. European Structural and Investment Funds: country factsheet –Cyprus, May 19, 2016. Retrieved on February 26, 2019. https://ec.eu- ropa.eu/regional_policy/en/information/publications/factsheets/2016/european- structuraland-investment-funds-country-factsheet-cyprus . European Commission, 2016b. European Structural and Investment Funds: Czech Republic fact sheet. May 19, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2019, from. https://ec.eu- ropa.eu/regional_policy/sources/policy/what/investment-policy/esif- countryfactsheet/esi_funds_country_factsheet_cz_en.pdf . European Commission, 2016c. European Structural and Investment Funds: Greece fact sheet, 2016, May 19. Retrieved January 8, 2019. https://ec.europa.eu/regional_pol- icy/en/information/publications/factsheets/2016/european-structuraland-invest- ment-funds-country-factsheet-greece . European Commission, 2016d. European Structural and Investment Funds: Country factsheet –Lithuania. https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/information/publica- tions/factsheets/2016/european-structuraland-investment-funds-country-factsheet- lithuania . European Commission, 2017a. The EU Environmental Implementation Review. Country report –Czech Republic. Commission Staf Working Document SWD 37 inal. Brussels, 3.2.2017. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/eir/pdf/report_cz_en.pdf . European Commission, 2017b. Factsheet Greece, DG Environment. February 2017. http:// ec.europa.eu/environment/eir/index_en.htm . European Commission, 2017c. Investment boost in Romania: circular economy project under Juncker Plan, three agreements under SME Initiative. October 19, 2017. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/news/investment-boost-romania-circular-econ-omy-project-underjuncker-plan-three-agreements-under-sme-initiative-2017-oct- 19_en . European Commission, 2018a. Flash Eurobarometer 456, SMEs, resource ef ﬁciency and green markets, January 2018. Online. http://ec.europa.eu/commfrontoice/ publicopinion/index.cfm/ResultDoc/download/DocumentKy/81280 .European Commission, 2018b. 2018 European semester: country reports. Retrieved on February 26, 2019 from:. https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/2018-european-se- mester-country-reports_en . European Commission, 2018c. Challenges for the Islands in the era of the Circular Econ- omy. International conference on Chania/Crete, 20 –22 September 2018. https://cir- cle2018.eu . European Commission, 2018d. EXTREMADURA 2030: strategy for green and circular economy. Retrieved from. https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/regional-in- novation-monitor/policydocument/extremadura-2030-strategy-green-and-circular- economy-0 . European Commission, 2019a. Circular Economy, DG GROW. Retrieved on April 12 2019 from. https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/sustainability/circular-economy_en . European Commission, 2019b. Second Environment Implementation Review . Retrieved from. http://ec.europa.eu/environmen t/eir/country-reports/index2_ en.htm . European Commission, 2019c. The Environmental Implementation Review 2019. Country report Greece. Retrieved on April 8 from. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/eir/pdf/ report_el_en.pdf . European Commission, 2019d. Report fro m the commission to the European Par- liament , the council, the European economic and social committee and the committee of the regions on the implementation of the circular econ- omy action plan COM/2019/190 ﬁnal. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-con- tent/EN/TXT/?qid=1551871195772&uri=CELEX:52019DC0190 . European Economic Area  Grants, 2019. Latvia EEA - Norway Grants. https:// eeagrants.org/latvia . European Environment Agency, 2013. Municipal waste management in Denmark. Re- trieved January 9, 2019, from. https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/managing- municipal-solidwaste/denmark-municipal-waste-management/view . European Environment Agency, 2018. Resource productivity, graph created 23 August 2018. Retrieved on April 8. https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/daviz/re- source-productivitygdp-dmc-5#tab-chart_1 . European Investment Bank, 2017. Recycling and circular economy. Green Fibre Interna- tional, Romania Retrieved from. http://reports.eib.org/eib-operations-inside-the-eu- 2017/recycling-andcircular-economy-green-ibre-international-romania . European Parliament, 2017a. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/resources/library/images/ 20170512PHT74421/20170512PHT74421_original.jpg . European Parliament, 2017b. European Parliamentary Research Service, Towards a Circu- lar Economy –Waste Management in EU. European Parliament, 2018. Waste management in the EU: infographic with facts and ﬁg- ures, 06-04-2018. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/resources/library/images/ 20180328PHT00737/20180328PHT00737_original.jpg . European Parliament, 2019. MEP VOTE.EU: vote result source. Statistics retrieved from. http://www.mepvote.eu and number of MEPs per country. http://www.europarl.eu- ropa.eu/meps/en/home . European Parliamentary Research Service, 2018. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/ thinktank/infographics/circulareconomy/public/index.html . Eurostat, 2017a. Circular economy indicators. Retrieved January 7, 2019. https://ec.eu- ropa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy/indicators/monitoring-framework . Eurostat, 2017b. Waste generation by packaging material. Share of treatment of all pack- aging waste in 2016. Retrieved on February 26, 2019 from 114. https://ec.europa.eu/ eurostat/statisticsexplained/index.php/Packaging_waste_statistics#Recycling_and_ recovery_rates . Eurostat, 2018. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3859598/9407565/KS-FT-18- 009-EN-N.pdf/b8efd42b-b1b8-41ea-aaa0-45e127ad2e3f . Eurostat, 2019a. Renewable Energy Statistics. Eurostat, 2019b. 487 kg of municipal waste generated per person, January 29, 2019. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/DDN-20190123-1 . Eurostat, 2019c. Treatment of waste by waste category, hazardousness and waste man- agement operations . Last update: 19-02-2019. https://ec.europa.eu/ eurostat/web/waste/waste-generation-and-management/management/incineration . Eurostat, 2019d. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular-economy/indicators/main- tables . Eurostat, 2019e. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/international-trade-in-goods/data/ database . EW-MFA Eurostat, 2010. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3217494/5723037/ KS-32-10-283-EN.PDF/22a4889d-e6c9-4583-8d17-fb5104e7eec0 . Food and Agriculture Organizations of the United Nation FAO, 2011. Global Food Losses and Food Waste: Extent, Causes and Prevention. Geng, Y., Fu, J., Sarkis, J., Xue, B., 2012. Towards a national circular economy indicator sys- tem in China: an evaluation and critical analysis. J. Clean. Prod. 23 , 216 –224. Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., Ulgiati, S., 2016. A review on circular economy: the expected tran- sition to a balanced interplay of environmental and economic systems. J. Clean. Prod. 114, 11 –32. Hahladakis, J.N., Iacovidou, E., 2019. An overview of the challenges and trade-offs in clos- ing the loop of post-consumer plastic waste : focus on recycling. J. Hazard. Mater. 380, 120887. Hislop, H., Hill, J., 2011. Reinventing the Wheel: A Circular Economy for Resource Security. Green Alliance. Horodytska, O., Valdés, F.J., Fullana, A., 2018. Plastic ﬂexible ﬁlms waste management –a state of art review. Waste Manag. 77, 413 –425. Iacovidou, E., Millward-Hopkins, J., Busch, J., Purnell, P., Velis, C.A., Hahladakis, J.N., Brown, A., 2017a. A pathway to circular economy: developing a conceptual framework for complex value assessment of resources recovered from waste. J. Clean. Prod. 168,1279 –1288. Iacovidou, E., Velis, C.A., Purnell, P., Zwirner, O., Brown, A., Hahladakis, J., ... Williams, P.T., 2017b. Metrics for optimising the multi-dimensional value of resources recovered11 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 from waste in a circular economy: A critical review. Journal of Cleaner Production 166, 910 –938. Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., Hekkert, M., 2017. Conceptualizing the circular economy: an anal- ysis of 114 de ﬁnitions. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 127, 221 –232. Korhonen, J., Nuur, C., Feldmann, A., Birkie, S.E., 2018. Circular economy as an essentially contested concept. J. Clean. Prod. 175, 544 –552. Liu, L., Liang, Y., Song, Q., Li, J., 2017. A review of waste prevention through 3R under the concept of circular economy in China. J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manag. 19 ,1314 –1323. Malinauskaite, J., Jouhara, H., Czajczy ńska, D., Stanchev, P., Katsou, E., Rostkowsk, P., ... Anguilano, L., 2017. Municipal Waste Management and Waste-to-energy in the Con- text of a Circular Economy and Energy Recycling in Europe. Michelini, G., Moraes, R.N., Cunha, R.N., Costa, J.M.H., Ometto, A.R., 2017. From linear to circular economy: PSS, conducting the transition. Procedia CIRP 64 , 2 –6. Minelgait ė, A., Liobikien ė, G., 2019. Waste problem in European Union and its in ﬂuence on waste management behaviours. Sci. Total Environ. 667, 86 –93. Møller, H., Hanssen, O.J., Svanes, E., Hartikainen, H., Silvennoinen, K., Gustavsson, J., Östergren, K., Schneider, F., Soethoudt, H., Canali, M., Politano, A., Gaiani, S.,Redlingshöfer, B., Moates, G., Waldron, K., Stenmarck, Å., 2014. Standard approach on quantitative techniques to be used to estimate food waste levels. FUSIONS Report.Murray, A., Skene, K., Haynes, K., 2017. The circular economy: an interdisciplinary explo- ration of the concept and application in a global context. J. Bus. Ethics 140 , 369–380. OECD, 2016. Extended producer responsibility. Updated guidance for ef ﬁcient waste management. http://www.oecd.org/development/extended-producer-responsibil- ity-9789264256385-en.htm . OECD, 2017. Making the Slovak Republic a more resource eicient economy. Retrieved from. http://www.oecd.org/environment/waste/Policy-Paper-Making-the-Slovak- Republic-a-more-resourceeicient-economy.pdf . Preston, F., 2012. A global redesign? Shaping the circular economy. Energy Environ. Resour. Gov. 2, 1 –20. Rizos, V., Behrens, A., Kafyeke, T., Hirschnitz-Garbers, M., Ioannou, A., 2015. The Circular Economy: Barriers and Opportunities for SMEs, CEPS Working Group –Work n. 412. Stahel, W.R., 2016. The circular economy. Nature 531, 435 –438, 23. UN Environment, 2019. Global resources outlook natural resources for the future we want. Retrieved on April 5, 2019 from. http://www.resourcepanel.org/reports/ global-resources-outlook . Winkler, H., 2011. Closed-loop production systems —A sustainable supply chain approach. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 4 , 243 –246. World Bank Report, 2019. https://olc.worldbank.org/content/circular-economy .12 A. Marino, P. Pariso / Science of the Total Environment 729  138142 

