Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Resources, Conservation & Recycling journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/resconrec Full length article Forecasting electronic waste ﬂows for e ﬀective circular economy planning Shahana Althaf, Callie W. Babbitt⁎, Roger Chen Golisano Institute for Sustainability, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY United States ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Electronic wasteCircular economyLogistic forecastingEmerging technology E-waste policy Material ﬂow analysis  Industrial ecologyABSTRACT Rapid evolution in the consumer electronics sector has created new resource and waste challenges that are inadequately managed in the current linear product system. Circular economy  strategies o ﬀer potential to close the loop on electronic products and materials, but often lack the future-oriented perspective needed to keep pace with this dynamic sector. The present study addresses this challenge by developing a logistic forecastingmaterial ﬂow model that can predict future resource and waste ﬂows for products with abundant historic sales data  as well as for products that have just entered the market . One of thekey trends observed across current and legacy electronics is the steadily shrinking innovation cycle, where thetime between a product ’s market entry and peak sales is decreasing over time. This trend, coupled with extensive historic and modern product sales data, was used to create adoption scenario forecasts for emerging products,likeﬁtness trackers, smart thermostats, and drones. Findings show that these devices are likely to have rapid uptake in the market, but may be quickly replaced by subsequent product innovations. In contrast, waste ﬂow forecasts for mature products like CRTs, desktops, monitors and ﬂat panel TVs showed their declining con- tribution to the U.S. e-waste stream. This study contributes a modeling framework that can be used to inform CEstrategies in electronics by identifying near term opportunities and risks in end-of-life management of productsto extend product life and close the loop on key materials. 1. Introduction Consumer electronics make up one of the fastest growing market segments in the United States, with annual shipments worth over $200 billion in revenue . Un- precedented innovation and increased consumer demand for faster,sleeker, and smaller devices have drastically changed the electronics landscape in the last decade. Large, single function products have been replaced with multifunctional portable products  and electronic components are increasingly integrated into accessories,clothing, appliances, and ﬁtness products . Industry groups predict that consumers will increasingly adopt smart hometechnology products including thermostats and security systems, while at the same time maintaining high ownership levels of traditional products like smart phones and televisions ( Consumer Technology Association, 2017). While the evolution and expansion of consumer electronics has enabled social, education, and communication advances, it has alsocreated new sustainability challenges . Electronic products are characterized by environmental impacts across all lifecycle stages, from raw material extraction to end-of-life productmanagement . The functionality of modern electronics is realized through a mix of complex components composed of precious, scarce and base metals ( Cucchiella et al., 2015; Tansel, 2017 ), which are extracted through energy intense processes leading to signiﬁcant upstream emissions . Many of the critical materials found in electronics, such as cobalt, lithium, and rare earth elements, are also widely used in electric vehicles and clean energy technologies, leading to concerns about their long-term supply security . In addition, legacy electronic components may contain hazardous materials like mercury, lead, and cadmium, whichmay cause harmful health and environmental impacts if not managed properly at end-of-life . Given rapid innovation cycles, increasing consumer adoption, and decliningproduct lifespans in the electronics sector , material consumption and waste generation are bound to increase in the future.Therefore, consumer electronics are ripe for a transformation via the circular economy, to minimize resource consumption, extend product lifespan through reuse, repair, and remanufacturing ( Bakker et al., 2014 ;Reike et al., 2018; Zlamparet et al., 2017; Zlamparet et al., 2018), and close the loop on material supply chains ( Işıldar et al., 2017 ;Zeng et al., 2018 ). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.05.038 Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 2 April 2019; Accepted 26 May 2019⁎Corresponding author at: Golisano Institute for Sustainability, United States. E-mail address: cwbgis@rit.edu .Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 Available online 20 September 2019 0921-3449/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. T Circular solutions may o ﬀer sustainability bene ﬁts for electronics, but they also face obstacles to widespread adoption . As the electronic product “ecosystem ”grows, the number, type, and diversity of devices requiring circular management also expand ( Ryen et al., 2014). This complexity can confound product repair, upgrade, disassembly, and material identi ﬁcation and segregation, all of which are labor-intense processes further slowed by product heterogeneityand lack of standardization . Where materials are recovered, recycling economics often hinge on a few low-volume,high-value materials, such as gold, which are increasingly diluted in the e-waste stream due to product light-weighting trends ( Kasulaitis et al., 2019 ). The presence of hazardous materials like lead and mercury in complex components like older printed circuit boards and display units also can limit recovery e ﬀorts . In addition, shrinking product lifespans  are e ﬀec- tively narrowing the window in which circular innovation can be de- ployed, leaving our e-waste management system to be “backwards looking ”- focusing on legacy devices that have been in the market for a long time, even while new products are emerging in the waste stream . These factors underscore the importance of creating circular economy  strategies that are agile and responsive to the evolving demand for and waste from consumer electronics consumption. CE in- terventions in electronics should respond to key leverage points that maximize resource e ﬃciency and minimize environmental burden, through green product design, creation of reuse markets, developmentof material recovery technologies to improve use of recycled materials in products, and policies to e ﬀectively engage multiple stakeholders in resource conservation and recovery activities ( Bocken et al., 2016; Gaustad et al., 2018; O’Connor et al., 2016 ). Green product design strategies include design for longevity , ease of disassembly , and reduced use of critical and environmentally intense materials . However, for most of these CE interventions to create proactive - rather thanreactive - solutions, they must be attuned to future resource demand and waste generation. Take for example the case of current U.S. e-waste policy im- plementation. The product categories that are most commonly covered under each state ’s policy mostly re ﬂect mature product categories that have already saturated the market, omitting emerging products whosematerial opportunities and risks are unknown ( Electronics TakeBack Coalition, 2015 ). Near term forecasts of consumer discards can inform e-waste policies, especially in setting the scope of products to be cov- ered under the policies and establishing realistic annual e-waste col- lection targets. Similarly, new product design would bene ﬁt  from better predictive capacity about which materials may be available from sec- ondary sources  and which materials may be scarce due to consumption in other competing industries. In any of these cases, proactive insight is necessary, but fundamentally limited by a lack of the predictive tools and data needed to forecast physical ﬂows in the evolving electronics sector, which is key in circular economy implementation . Therefore, this paper addresses the question: How do we proactively plan and deploy CE strategies for the rapidly evolving electronic pro-duct sector? This challenge is addressed by creating and validating models to forecast product sales and e-waste generation and then using these models to identify issues and opportunities for circular economy in the electronics sector. To this end, historic product adoption data are studied to generalize the factors that govern product adoption trajec- tories and then applied to the model based on established e-waste es- timation methods from literature, to generate near term forecasts for both mature and emerging products. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2reviews forecasting literature that guided the development of the model. Section 3describes the methodology, including model de- velopment, validation, and application to inform CE planning. Sub- sequent sections discuss results and broader implications.2. Literature review E-waste estimation methods in the literature include input-output models, factor models, time series, econometric analysis, and directwaste analysis . Among these, ma- terial ﬂow analysis , which is an extension of input-output modeling, is widely used and an appropriate choice for CE planning, as it enables estimation of the product and material demand and man- agement of secondary resources . MFA esti- mates the stocks and ﬂows of materials within a de ﬁned temporal and spatial system, commonly using data on commodity ﬂows into the system and their discard rates . In most e-waste literature, MFA applications are typically static or retrospective (Kasulaitis et al., 2019 ;Li et al., 2015; Miller et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2013 ), due to the nature of available data. However, CE planning re- quires a more proactive approach, thus requiring forecasts of product adoption and obsolescence. Such information is not commonly avail- able, but potentially can be approximated according to models of pro- duct adoption cycles. Forecasting product adoption is commonly achieved using the “S- shaped ”logistic curve, or sigmoid curve, to describe a product market adoption cycle ( Fisher and Pry, 1971 ;Kucharavy and De Guio, 2015, 2011 ;Marchetti and Nakicenovic, 1979 ;Meyer et al., 1999; Yang and Williams, 2009). The three parameter logistic curve commonly used insocio-technical systems , has its roots in ecology, where it was originally used to model population growth ofbiological species . While the logistic curve describes a product’ s  growth until it reaches market saturation, it does not cap- ture the entire market life cycle, which includes an inevitable decline due to substitution by competing technologies. The Norton-Bass model, which includes logistic distribution as a special case, captures both adoption and substitution leading to a product ’s decline ( Norton and Bass, 1987 ). This approach has been applied to forecasting consumer electronics, including LCD TVs  , mobile phones, computers  , and desktop displays . However, as pointed out by Tseng et al.  , the Norton-Bass model is mostly suited for modeling direct substitutions by successive gen- erations of technology, which is not always observed in consumer electronics, particularly in the case of disruptive innovation. The Fisher- Pry model  has also been applied in electronics forecasting, an approach that uses a two-parameter logistic model to describe tech- nology substitution . The logistic Fisher-Pry model was extended by Marchetti and Nakicenovic  to include mutliple generations of energy technologies, based on the assumption that technologies grow and decline at logistic rates. This model has been used to study adoption of music media  and OLED TVs . While these studies show that logistic growth-decline is an apt approximation to describe product adoption cycles, these models are again reliant on knowledge of subsequent generational replacements. In reality, replacement cycles and product innovation in consumer electronics are challenging to predict, as decline of one technology generation is not always predicated solely on substitution by the next generation. In many cases, functional convergence leads to decline of many single function devices due to simultaneous substitution by one new multifunctional product. For example, the decline of digital cam- eras, camcorders, and MP3 players was driven by the advent of smartphones, which would not be otherwise predicted as a successive generation of those products. Similarly, in the case of AV  media, the decline of Blu-ray and DVD players was triggered by the advent of new streaming media services, rather than a new product generation (Fig. S1 in the Supplemental Information illustrates the technological shifts and substitution in AV products). Therefore, to in- tegrate product adoption cycles in electronics forecasting, it is useful to develop modeling capability that can capture adoption trends on a product-by-product basis, even in the absence of information aboutS. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 2 subsequent generations of technology. The methods applied in this paper build on the foundation of models described above, through use of the logistic growth and decay curves that have been applied to technology adoption broadly and e-waste forecasts speci ﬁcally. One new contribution is the construction of these curves independently, without the speci ﬁcation of an unknown suc- cessive replacement technology required to trigger product decline. Another contribution is the focus on emerging electronic technologies that are not yet widely adopted. Literature examples have provided several demonstrations of forecasting waste ﬂow from speci ﬁc product categories that already comprise a major part of the e-waste stream,such as computers ( Kahhat and Williams, 2012 ;Petridis et al., 2016; Rahmani et al., 2014 ;Yang and Williams, 2009; Yu et al., 2010 ), or on products with known hazards, such as cathode ray tube  TVs . However, for CE planning, it is equally important to forecast adoption for newer technologies, requiringmodeling advances in data-scarce cases. 3. Methodology This paper ’s objective is to present an MFA model developed to proactively inform key leverage points that can enable CE solutions for electronics. For example, for mature products that are declining or no longer sold in the market, a critical CE challenge is how to recover and manage these products over the remainder of their life cycle, particu- larly if no demand exists for their reuse or for their component mate- rials. Another challenge is to understand how e-waste policy im- plementation might be a ﬀected by the decline of these products in the waste stream. For emerging products, which may have unforeseensustainability risks but that are not typically covered by e-waste po- licies, projections are essential to model timing and magnitude of po- tential resource demand or the extent to which circular material sys- tems can provide these resources with secondary or closed-loop supply. Thus, the predictive MFA model was developed with the aforemen- tioned CE challenges in mind. The overarching approach was to use historical sales data to construct logistic curves of product adoption anddecline, and then apply these curves to project future product con- sumption and waste ﬂows , as explained in more detail in the following subsections. 3.1. MFA model framework The MFA model ) estimates annual waste ﬂows using pro- duct sales and lifespan probability distributions. ∑=× =− WLS pt in pi pt , 1,, 1 where Wp, tis the waste ﬂow of product p in year t, L is the probability that product p will reach its end-of-life with a lifespan of i years, S is the annual product sales into US households for each year, and n is the maximum lifespan. 3.1.1. Product sales Based on ﬁndings from the literature review described above, pro- duct sales  were approximated by a three-parameter logistic curve ), which includes phases of product growth, saturation, and then decline in the market, similar to the approach of Marchetti and Nakicenovic  andMeyer et al.  . =⎧ ⎨⎩∀≤ ∀>++ +−−−Stt ttpt a ea e, 11peak peak btcbtc 21  Here, a product ’s sales over its entire market cycle can be described by the time it takes to reach peak adoption , the maximum adoption level or peak sales units , growth and decay rates , and growth and decay midpoints, which are the times at which the curve reaches the in ﬂection point of a/2 . For simplicity, the parameter b is replaced by the equation ln/ Δt, whereΔtis the time required for the logistic curve to grow from 10% to 90% of the carrying capacity  or decay from 90% to 10% , a simpli ﬁcation demonstrated by Meyer et al.  . Additional information on the estimation of parameters a, Δt, and c is provided in section 3.2. The choice of logistic curve was veri ﬁed by testing Eq. against real product sales data. Ten products were selected that had high quality sales data spanning the entire period between the product ’s entry into the market to present . These data were provided by the Consumer Technology Association as reported in Babbitt et al.  . The growth and decline curve for each product was tested against candidate dis-tributions using a least squares estimation approach as implemented in MATLAB. Goodness of ﬁt parameters, including R-squared, SSE (sum of squared errors) and BIC  were used toconﬁrm that logistic curves were the best distribution to represent adoption cycle of electronics. The MATLAB code for the MFA model andall related data sheets are provided at Althaf  . 3.1.2. Product lifespan The other key input to the forecasting MFA model according to Eq. is the lifespan probability distribution for each product. A Weibull distribution is applied here, as it is the most commonly used distribu- tion to model lifespan of electronics in literature ( Bakker et al., 2014; Gu et al., 2018 ;Nakatani and Moriguchi, 2014 ;Oguchi and Kameya, 2008 ). The Weibull PDF  is given below: =−− ftγαγ αt αe  γt αγ  Fig. 1. Conceptual framework of the methodology adopted in this study to enable proactive CE planning in the electronics sector. Gray boxes and arrows represent data inputs collected from literature and electronics industry sources. All other boxes and arrows represent model calculations and outputs.S. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 3 where γis the shape parameter, αis the scale parameter and t is the time. The shape and scale parameters describing the distribution are computed from mean and maximum product lifespan estimates from literature  ﬁle, Table S1). In this study, lifespan is de ﬁned as the total time that a product resides within a household during its ﬁrst life, after which it becomes available for end-of-life management, which may include reuse, recycling formaterial recovery, or discarding. 3.2. MFA model parameters for mature products Parameterizing the model described in Eqs. andis relatively straightforward for mature products, because past sales data are readily available. The 11 products considered in the mature product category are: CRT  monitors, CRT TVs, desktop computers, printers, laptop computers, LCD  monitors, LCD TVs, Plasma TVs, LED  monitors, LED TVs, and tablets. For these products, parameter estimation was carried out by ﬁtting the three-parameter logistic curve to each product ’s unit sales over time. Depending on the product, di ﬀerent degrees of the market life cycle are covered by the available sales data, ranging from only a few years  to a full life cycle . In all cases, parameters were extracted from the product-speci ﬁc logistic curve based on least squares estimation. . The application of the MFA model to mature products is particularly important from the standpoint of assessing e-waste policy in relation to CE planning. The mature products analyzed here are those that are most commonly covered by e-waste legislation in U.S. states. The MFA results describe waste ﬂows in units of products, which were then translated to overall waste stream magnitude based on each product ’s average mass. Mass results help relate the waste projections to mass-based collectionor recycling targets used by most states in the U.S. Product mass esti- mations were determined using literature and disassembly as described inBabbitt et al.  andKasulaitis et al.  , as summarized in SI Table S3. 3.3. MFA model parameters for emerging products In the case of emerging products, for which historic adoption data are scarce, the guiding approach in estimating parameters for logistic forecasting was to analyze how past products behaved in the market, identify trends in the underlying logistic curve size and shape, and then extend these trends to products recently introduced. The historic sales data of over 15 products  that entered the market between 1962 and 2009 were compiled, and the key parameters that describetheir logistic market trajectory  were extracted. One of the clear relationships revealed was that theseparameters were inversely related to year of market entry. In other words, innovation cycles, or the time between a product entering the market and reaching saturation at peak sales, are shrinking in a steady and predictable way. Curve ﬁtting to this temporal trend was tested to determine if year of market entry could e ﬀectively predict time to peak and growth rate, resulting in an exponential curve (R 2= 0.82) as shown in Fig. 2, where t peakis the time until a product reaches its peak sales and Y mis the year the product enters the market. To validate this trend, the predicted exponential curve was compared against a di ﬀerent set of 10 products  that were not part of the original curve formulation. This strong agreement was consistent forexponential curves relating year of market entry to other necessarylogistic parameters, including growth rate and sigmoid midpoint (See SI Table S4 and Fig. S2 and S3). Thus, most of the parameters required to construct the logistic sales curve ) for emerging products can be predicted by specifying only the year in which that product is ﬁrst sold in the market. The other parameter required to apply the logistic model )i sa, the carrying capacity, or in terms of electronic products, the max- imum level of product sales. For emerging technologies, this parameter is diﬃcult to anticipate, given the unpredictable nature of technological progress and the rate at which consumer attention ﬂickers from one gadget to the next. However, past product behavior can again inform projections of future product trends. In this case, the type of product  was observed in historical sales data to be strongly related to the maximum peak sales. Some products, like phones, are owned by individuals, rather than households, and are seen to be commonplace in modern work and life, which is supported by high sales rates (over 1.5 smartphones were purchased per average U.S. household in 2018). On the other hand, stationary, home-based AV equipment is shared among members of a household and the saturation point will be lower (about 0.2 VCR or DVD players were purchased per household in the year that each of these products ’sales peaked). The historical peak sales per household were tabulated for all pro- ducts listed in Table 1, and grouped under categories that describe a product ’s form or function: Computing (including computers, monitors,Table 1 Products used to identify temporal trends in parameters describing logistic product adoption curves. Products shaded in gray were used to construct pre-dictive trends while remaining products were used to validate the resulting curves. Fig. 2. The time between a product entering the market and reaching its peak sales volume is shown here to steadily decrease over time. A predictive re- lationship is built using products represented by ﬁlled circles and then validated by comparison against additional products .S. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 4 and printers); TVs (including multiple technologies of CRT, LCD, LED, and plasma); Home media ; Small mobile devices (MP3 players, digital cameras, portable navigation systems, etc.); and Phones . A full list of products assigned to each category and their peak sales is pro- vided in the SI Table S5. These data are summarized in Fig. 3, which visually illustrates the ranges in peak sales observed. Most productcategories demonstrated consistent ranges of adoption peaks. One ex- ception was for those products that were ultimately only adopted to a limited degree (maximum sales of only about 0.05 –0.1 products per household even in the highest sales year). These products, which re-present a scenario of “limited adoption, ”included devices like Plasma TVs and e-readers, both of which were quickly outcompeted by pro-ducts seeing “mainstream adoption, ”such as LCD TVs and tablets, re- spectively. The limited and main stream adoption ranges assigned toeach product category is presented in SI Table S6. Using the approximations described above, the logistic parameters for an emerging product could be generated using only two pieces of information: 1) the year of market entry, which was used to extrapolate the curve shown in Fig. 2 to determine time to peak; and 2) the type of product it was , which would establish ranges of the curve ’s maximum sales in either a trajectory of mainstream or limited adoption. To demonstrate the MFA model ’s applicability in forecasting re- source demand from emerging products, it was applied to four casestudy products that represent a spectrum of new electronic technolo- gies: 1) ﬁtness trackers; 2) smart thermostats; 3) drones; and 4) OLED  TVs. Fitness trackers were modeled assmall mobile devices; smart thermostats and drones as home media products; and OLED TVs within the TV category. While ﬁtness trackers and drones are fundamentally new products, smart thermostatsrepresent a case such that a “non-smart ”alternative already exists, and adoption would be related to replacement of legacy systems. Based onthese observations, emerging products were modeled under both po- tential trajectories: limited adoption, which constrained a, or peak sales, to between 0.05 - 0.1 products sold per household; and main-stream adoption, which set peak sales to be equivalent to the mean value observed for the product category to which each of these devices is categorized, including an uncertainty range of +/- 10%. 3.4. MFA model application to study interactions of mature and emerging technologies Finally, the potential usefulness of the predictive model to study interactions of mature and emerging technologies for CE planning whentechnology substitutions occur was demonstrated using the case of TV technologies. TVs are the most commonly covered device across all U.S. state e-waste policies and have historically been a primary focus of hazard-based e-waste management, due to lead contained in CRT glass and the mercury contained in ﬂuorescent-lit LCD displays. OLED TVs represent a natural innovation in display technology that has beenprogressing over multiple generations, and therefore the forecasts of OLED TV adoption were coupled with logistic models of past TV tech- nology, and the potential evolution of e-waste in the TV category was projected for the next 15 years, a time period selected to re ﬂect the long lifespans of these products within the household. Perfect substitution ofOLED for LED technology was assumed, based on similar observation of each past TV technology generation. 4. Results The key outcome of this study is the development of an MFA model based on logistic forecasting that can be used to predict ﬂows of pro- ducts with abundant historic data and for those with scarce adoption data, to inform proactive CE strategies. The following sections detail the results for model validation and then demonstrate the model ’s applic- ability in addressing key data challenges in circular economy planningfor electronics. 4.1. Model validation The use of a three-parameter logistic curve in modeling adoption cycles  of products was tested against real sales curves of existing electronics products. Logistic was the best distribu- tion of those compared, based on goodness of ﬁt parameters such as SSE, R square and BIC. The full list of curve ﬁtting statistics is reported in SI Table S7. The forecasting capability of the MFA model is validated by comparing model generated e-waste ﬂows of CRT monitors, Desktops, Printers, LED monitors, LCD TVs and Laptops with wasteﬂows estimated using actual annual sales data from 2000 to 2018. Fig. 3. Ranges of peak sales  for products according to functional categories. Median values are shown as a line across each box. Fig. 4. Comparison of e-waste ﬂows estimated using the three-parameter model of logistic sales to e-waste ﬂows calculated directly from real sales data of the products. E-waste ﬂows reﬂect annual out ﬂows from U.S. households in thousands of units. Line plots indicate fore-casting model results while scatter plots in-dicate waste ﬂows estimated from real sales data.S. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 5 Results  show that forecast results are in strong agreement with those generated from real data, with less than 5% error in cumulative ﬂows across products. Waste ﬂows forecasted ﬁve years forward show how the model captures the e ﬀect of product market decline on e-waste estimations. Waste ﬂow forecasts in Fig. 4 predict that CRT monitor units in the residential e-waste stream will soon be insigni ﬁcant, which should help alleviate concerns about lead exposure during their downstream man-agement. However, in the short term, few opportunities exist for closing the loop on these materials, as no demand exists for product reuse or CRT glass recovery. Waste ﬂow forecasts for computing and display technologies like laptops and LCD TVs and monitors show that theseproducts have likely reached their peak and will start slowly declining in the waste stream. In ﬁve years, laptops and printers are forecasted to decrease 20% from their current waste ﬂow while waste LCD TVs are predicted to decline more than 50% from present. Desktop computers are expected to sharply decline  in the waste stream in the next ﬁve years, which is expected to have interactive e ﬀects on monitors, which are typically purchased to use with desktop computing. A com-parison with waste ﬂow forecasts by past studies  show that while our model results deviate for some products such aslaptops and printers , results are close to past estimations for desktops , ﬂat panel monitors , and TVs . While desktop waste ﬂows estimated by the MFA model for year 2010 di ﬀered by less than 1%  from those reported by Miller et al  , monitor waste ﬂows de- viated by more than 20% from the study which applied the same sales- lifespan MFA method. Here the di ﬀerence is likely due to our under- lying assumption that monitor adoption follows a 1:1 ratio with desktopsales, based on input from consumer technology industry experts  rather than using real monitor sales data, which is available to a limited degree but does not account for monitors soldwith desktops as a package. Other di ﬀerences from past studies could be attributed to un- certainties in lifespan assumptions, as deﬁ nition of product lifespans vary widely . While model forecasts are impacted by lifespan uncertainties, the trends shown in this and other studies areconsistent, and the projected decrease in forecast e-waste ﬂows is un- likely to change, as it is primarily driven by in ﬂows to households in the way of new sales, which have begun to decline for all mature products studied. These results have signi ﬁcant implications to e-waste policy planning, as the products analyzed here are the commonly covereddevices in U.S. state e-waste policies. 4.2. Forecasting implications to U.S. e-waste policy Under extended producer responsibility  policies adopted for end-of-life management of electronics in many US states, collection targets are set based on manufacturers ’shares of covered products in the waste stream, as determined by sales-adjusted mass estimates. The process of setting collec- tion targets often relies on observed trends in past years ’product col- lection rates as the main factor in determining the next year ’s recovery goals . Neither states nor manu- facturers typically have the modeling capability to predict future waste ﬂows, limiting their ability to set appropriate targets or plan for end-of- life management. Therefore, the predictive MFA model o ﬀers sig- niﬁcant utility for these stakeholders in its ability to project e-waste ﬂows over a near-term time horizon. To assess how this model might be used by policy stakeholders, it is applied to commonly covered devicesin U.S. state policies, which include mature products such as TVs, monitors, computers, and printers, to estimate their cumulative waste ﬂows in the U.S. . These estimates were generated using the logistic forecasting model for a 15-year period, which includes recentpast and six years beyond the present. Note that the model predicts the total mass of products coming out of households, which may then gointo reuse, recycling, or discard pathways. E-waste ﬂow forecasts in Fig. 5 suggest that the mature products that are currently the focus of state e-waste policies are beginning todecline in the waste stream, a trend expected to continue in the next several years. This trend is largely attributable to the changing mix of display technologies, where heavy CRT TVs and monitors are no longer sold and slowly empty from consumers ’households, while being re- placed with lighter products such as ﬂat panel displays and tablets. These results point to potential sustainability bene ﬁts of reducing the overall amount of e-waste requiring management, particularly deviceswhich contain hazardous materials such as CRT  and LCD displays . On the other hand, the shift introduces new uncertainties for the recycling industry, which has long been established around pro- cessing large products with high potential for disassembly and com- ponent and material recovery. Further, the decline of mature products will be o ﬀset to a degree by other products that are now emerging or growing, but that are not covered under such policies. For example,smartphones, which are a small contribution to e-waste by mass, con- tain a high concentration of valuable materials including gold, cobalt, and lithium . In addition, TVs, which show signiﬁcant dynamism within this policy case, contain indium, a scarce material for which very limited recycling is currently possible ( Buchert et al., 2012 ). As policy is a key enabler of the circular economy, e-waste regula- tions are expected to increase the ability to repair and reuse products orrecover materials that can be returned to functional use in new devices. However, the forecasted decreasing trends in cumulative waste ﬂow suggest that states will need to fundamentally shift from product col-lection and recovery targets based on mass alone. Already, states have informally reported declining collection rates, and at least one state, Illinois, is moving away from mass targets to convenience-based sys- tems, which emphasize consumer access to e-waste collection points. It is challenging to benchmark these forecasts to other studies, as mostliterature applies a retrospective rather than prospective approach. Comparison of e-waste ﬂow estimates with past studies ( Powell and Chertow, 2018; U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2016 b) show comparable trends in the lead-up to peak waste ﬂows (estimated in Fig. 5 to be 2016 –2017). However, it should be noted that results presented here are for the U.S. residential/consumer sector only, and so the magnitude of ﬂows will naturally be smaller than the above-men- tioned studies, which include residential and commercial sectors to-gether. A direct comparison of results to a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  study, which applied the same sales-lifespan method for e-waste estimations from 1990 to 2010, is provided in SI Fig. S4, con ﬁrming consistency in trends for the overlapping period. 4.3. Forecasting implications of emerging technologies The predictive MFA model was applied to four case study products that represent a wide array of emerging technologies for which data arescarce and near-term forecasting is necessary to identify potential op- portunities and risks for CE planning. For each of the emerging tech- nologies  both mainstream and limited adoption trajectories were projectedbased on the peak sales ranges for the product categories to which these technologies most closely align. The forecasts, shown in Fig. 6, were generated using only the year of market entry  and the product category . Forecast results, compared against the limited real sales data that are available , show that among the products studied,drones and ﬁtness trackers have reached or may soon approach their peak. As per the adoption forecasts, ﬁtness trackers have entered mainstream adoption in a manner consistent with other small mobile products and have reached the maximum carrying capacity or peak sales to households. On the other hand, drones appear to be unlikely toS. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 6 enter mainstream adoption as a household product. Annual sales of ﬁtness trackers, which are currently around 22 million units, are un- likely to go above 35 million units, while maximum annual sales ofdrones are unlikely to go above 10 million units, if these products follow the trends of past products in their respective categories. The smart thermostat results suggest that they are still in the growth phase, but as a home product, the annual sales will likely peak at less than 25 million units, even if they enter mainstream adoption. Even though it is too early to con ﬁrm which adoption scenario OLED TVs will follow, the mainstream ranges are more likely, given past TV turnover and a recentpeak of LED TV sales, which is usually a harbinger that a substitute product is beginning to invade the market niche. These case study ﬁndings, which can easily be extended to any electronic product with only a limited amount of data, have signi ﬁcant implications for circular resource management. Many of these productscontain complex components like lithium-ion batteries, which contain critical materials that are in high demand in other sectors, includingelectric vehicle manufacturing. In the case of emerging display tech- nology OLEDs, which contains display units that employ thin, organic carbon-based ﬁlms for lighting , the implications on resource consumption and end-of-life management are unknown. Thisuncertainty underscores the need for forecasts that predict likely ma- terial implications. As discussed before, whether a technology will achieve mainstream adoption depends on similar competing technolo- gies in the market. In the case of TVs, another emerging technology is also beginning to grow: QLEDs  are a variation of display technology recently introduced that may ultimately compete for market share with OLEDs. QLED displays are typically constructed using indium or cadmium-based nano-structured materials, for which additional environmental risks are unknown . 4.4. Forecasting interactions between mature and emerging products TV technology evolution is a unique case because it allows for a Fig. 5. Application of the predictive model to inform e-waste policies, demonstrated through estimation of cumulative waste ﬂows  of devices commonly covered for recovery under U.S. state e-waste legislations. . Fig. 6. Forecast sales of emerging products: ﬁtness trackers, smart thermostats, drones and OLED TVs. Comparison of possible mainstream and limited adoption scenarios  with the actual available sales data suggests which of the two adoption trajectories each product may follow.S. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 7 direct assessment of how product interactions, technological shifts, and substitution cycles ultimately in ﬂuence e-waste ﬂows and resource demand. From a circular economy standpoint, this information is cri-tical to understand the capacity for closed-loop systems, in which ma- terials are recovered from one type of product and returned to another of the same type. Such an approach may be most useful in products containing unique materials, such as the cobalt contained in mobile products ’batteries, or the rare earth phosphors used in LED-lit ﬂat panel TVs. As technology shifts, gaps open between increasing sec- ondary material supply from products that have peaked and the de- mand for secondary materials by the product starting to emerge . This dynamic is illustrated in Fig. 7 by coupling the waste ﬂow forecasts of OLED TV with those of mature TV tech- nologies presented in section 4.1. TV technology forecasts are important to CE planning because these products are characterized by high mass, contain materials of interest, and form a signi ﬁcant part of the e-waste targeted for collection by state e-waste policies. The technology shifts in this product category havehistorically created challenges in their waste management, due to changing material pro ﬁles. Currently, CRT displays continue to persist in the waste stream, but no closed-loop solutions exist. As these pro-ducts are no longer on the market, there is no demand in the electronics sector for the materials or components they contain. LCD TVs, which contain mercury in the cold-cathode ﬂuorescent lamps used for back- lights, have also peaked in the waste stream and are beginning to de-cline. The forecasts suggest that these TV technologies  will become insigni ﬁcant in the waste stream in ﬁve-to-ten years, whereas LED TVs will make up a signi ﬁcant fraction of the waste ﬂow. These forecasts highlight the need to prepare for end-of-life manage- ment of LED and OLED TVs to recover critical materials like indium  back into the manufacturing pipeline. It is to be noted that we have assumed maximum adoption scenario ofOLED TVs in this analysis and have not considered in ﬂuence of a competing technology like QLED in the market, which may bring itsown challenges in end-of-life management of TVs as their displays are based on cadmium and indium nanostructured materials ( Bagher, 2017; Chopra and Theis, 2017 ;Scalbi et al., 2017 ). These results emphasize the utility of the forecasting MFA model in understanding the im- plications of interactions between mature and emerging products in the material pro ﬁle of the waste stream and associated circular economy strategies. 5. Implications to CE planning Applying the forecasting MFA to mature and emerging electronic products provides insights on key factors for e ﬀective CE planning, given the evolving nature of the e-waste stream and rapid pace oftechnological innovations. For example, the e-waste stream undergoes dematerialization when new technologies have signi ﬁcantly lower mass than products they substitute, especially in the case of TVs. The masscontribution of TVs in e-waste is forecasted to diminish 50% in the next ﬁve years, mainly due to dematerialization trends . Another key trend is the decline in TV technologies that contain ha-zardous materials like lead and mercury, where lead from CRTs is forecasted to drop to less than 5 thousand metric tons by 2025, from the current level of 70 thousand metric tons in the e-waste stream. On the other hand, increased demand is expected for potentially scarce mate- rials like indium due to continued growth of ﬂat panel display tech- nologies. However, combining the TV forecasts with literature esti-mates of indium content per TV  suggest that indium in the waste stream from LCD and LED TVs may actually exceedits demand in these technologies by more than 30% within 5 years, due to increased adoption of lighter TV technologies. These trends suggest great potential for circular strategies that would close the loop on scarce materials in ﬂat panel TVs, if recycling technology were devel- oped to recover these materials. Similar potential for circularity is observed in critical metals like cobalt and lithium, found in lithium-ion batteries that are key compo-nents of mobile electronics. For example, adoption and waste ﬂow es- timates of laptops show that cobalt contained in laptop batteries in theU.S. e-waste stream outweighs its demand in batteries for new laptop computers, a product where sales are slowing while batteries are also becoming lighter and more material e ﬃcient. In fact, the projected cobalt waste ﬂow from laptops  is likely to soon exceed the combined cobalt demand for batteries in laptops and drones . (See SI Tables S8-S12 for the data and calculations used in these informal estimates). While these trends in material ﬂows, where material content in e-waste ex- ceeds its demand, indicate theoretical potential to close the materialloop in electronics, implementation is limited at present by lack of ef- fective recycling technologies and infrastructure. This highlights the need to enable other circular economy strategies that extend product and component lifespan, such as product reuse, repair, refurbishment and remanufacturing. The methods developed in the present study can support these CE strategies through estimations of product waste ﬂows that represent the products available after primary use, for life spanextension or material recovery measures. However, consumer educa- tion and implementation of e ﬀective e-waste policies and collection systems are key in ensuring circular end-of-life pathways to recover used products from consumers, and for enabling all aspects of CE in- cluding reuse, repair, remanufacturing and recycling ( Gaustad et al., 2018 ). The study ﬁndings also imply the need to shift the focus of end-of- life management of electronics away from mass-based diversionFig. 7. The evolving U.S. TV waste ﬂow, re ﬂecting multiple generations of technology substitution, and its implication on reducing the e-waste stream due to light- weighting over time.S. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 8 mechanisms and towards a broader perspective on sustainable mate- rials management. The projected trends in e-waste generation empha- size the need to move away from the use of policy where all materials are treated equally, to explore alternate methods for setting collection targets, such as those based on environmental or economic savings associated with the circular economy. A holistic waste management approach was proposed by Anshassi et al.  in which they de- monstrated use of life cycle inventory-normalized collection targets forsolid waste management in Florida. Similar waste management me- chanisms are worth exploring in the electronics sector, as it will shift the focus to materials and products with the greatest bene ﬁt for re- covery via circular economy initiatives. In electronics, a similar ap-proach was proposed by Wang and Gaustad  , to prioritize eco- nomic value, energy saving potentials, and eco-toxicity in prioritizingmaterial recovery from printed circuit boards. However, planning for such policy targets requires product level sustainability analysis, the key barrier being the lack of comprehensive knowledge on environ- mental and economics tradeo ﬀs associated with material use and ma- terial recovery, topics that should be prioritized in future study. 6. Conclusions For CE strategies to keep pace with the rapid pace of innovation in the electronics sector, proactive tools are needed to generate near term forecasts of resource demand and e-waste ﬂows. This study contributes a novel method for informing circular economy planning in the elec-tronics sector. The key contribution of this model is the use of historic sales data for over 25 products to create future-oriented sales curves that can then be used to forecast demand and waste ﬂow of products irrespective of their historic data availability. Application of the modelto mature and emerging electronic products helped identify near-term challenges and opportunities for CE planning. This model is ﬂexible, and with appropriate validation, can be used to study other product categories and a broader range of consumer electronics. The model also provides a sca ﬀold on which other circular economy metrics can be built, coupling product ﬂows with material pro ﬁle data and sustain- ability impacts associated with speci ﬁc materials. While material ﬂow forecasts for emerging products based on generalized trends can beburdened with uncertainty, this study takes the view that we cannot wait until data are perfected, or otherwise, proactive opportunities to implement circular economy strategies will be lost. Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge and thank Hema Madaka, Mosunmola Odulate, and Dr. Erinn Ryen for their assistance in elec- tronic product disassembly and data collection. This article is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation (CBET- 1236447 and CBET-1254688), the Consumer Technology Association, and the Staples Sustainable Innovation Lab at Rochester Institute of Technology. Findings and conclusions reported here are those of the authors and do not necessarily re ﬂect the views of the funding orga- nizations. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.05. 038. References Althaf, S., 2019. Predictive Material Flow Model, V1.0.0. https://doi.org/10.5281/ zenodo.3244095 . Anshassi, M., Laux, S., Townsend, T.G., 2018. Replacing Recycling Rates with Life-Cycle Metrics as Government Materials Management Targets. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52,6544 –6554. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b06007 . Babbitt, C., Kahhat, R., Williams, E., Babbitt, G., 2009. Evolution of Product Lifespan and Implications for Environmental Assessment and Management : A Case Study of Personal Computers in Higher Education. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43, 5106 –5112 . Babbitt, C.W., Althaf, S., Chen, R., 2017. Sustainable Materials Management for the Evolving Consumer Technology Ecosystem. Summary Report of Phase 1 Research . Bagher, A.M., 2017. Quantum dot display technology and comparison with OLED display technology. Int. J. Adv. Res. Phys. Sci. 4, 48 –53. Bakker, C., Wang, F., Huisman, J., Den Hollander, M., 2014. Products that go round : exploring product life extension through design. J. Clean. Prod. 69, 10 –16.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.01.028 . Balde, C.P., Forti, V., Gray, V., Kuehr, R., Stegmann, P., 2017. The Global E-waste Monitor 2017: Quantities. Flows and Resources . Bocken, N.M.P., De Pauw, I., Bakker, C., Van Der Grinten, B., 2016. Product design and business model strategies for a circular economy. J. Ind. Prod. Eng. 1015, 1 –12. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124 . Boks, C., Stevels, A., 2014. Essential perspectives for Design for Environment : Experiences from the electronics industry. Int. J. Prod. Res. 45, 4021 –4039. https:// doi.org/10.1080/00207540701439909 . Brunner, P.H., Rechberger, H., 2004. Practical Handbook of Material Flow Analysis. Taylor & F. ed. Lewis Publishers . Buchert, M., Manhart, A., Bleher, D., Pingel, D., 2012. Recycling Critical Raw Materials From Waste Electronic Equipment . Chen, A., Dietrich, K.N., Huo, X., Ho, S., 2011. Developmental neurotoxicants in E-Waste: an emerging health concern. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 431 –438. https://doi. org/10.1289/ehp.1002452 . Cho, Y., Daim, T., 2016. OLED TV technology forecasting using technology mining and the Fisher-Pry di ﬀusion model. Foresight 18, 117 –137. https://doi.org/10.1108/FS- 08-2015-0043 . Chopra, S.S., Theis, T.L., 2017. Comparative cradle-to-gate energy assessment of indium phosphide and cadmium selenide quantum dot displays. Environ. Sci. Nano Nano 4, 244–254. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6EN00326E . Consumer Technology Association, 2017. 19th Annual Consumer Technology Ownership and Market Potential Study_April 2017 . Cucchiella, F., Adamo, I.D., Koh, S.C.L., Rosa, P., 2015. Recycling of WEEEs : An eco- nomic assessment of present and future e-waste streams. Renew. Sust. Energy Rev.51, 263 –272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.06.010 . Dutta, T., Kim, K., Uchimiya, M., Kwon, E.E., Jeon, B., Deep, A., Yun, S., 2016. Global demand for rare earth resources and strategies for green mining. Environ. Res. 150, 182–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2016.05.052 . Electronics TakeBack Coalition, 2015. Scope of Products in E-Waste Laws. Retrieved from. http://www.electronicstakeback.com/wp-content/uploads/Scope_of_Product_ in_Ewaste_Laws.pdf . Fisher, J.C., Pry, R.H., 1971. A simple substitution model of technological change. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 3, 75 –88. Gaustad,  G., Krysto ﬁk, M., Bustamante, M., Badami, K., 2018. Circular economy strategies for mitigating critical material supply issues. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 24 –33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.08.002 . Gu, Y., Wu, Y., Xu, M., Mu, X., Zuo, T., 2018. Waste electrical and electronic equipment  recycling for a sustainable resource supply in the electronics industry in China. J. Clean. Prod. 127, 331 –338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.041 . Gusukuma, M., Kahhat, R., 2018. Electronic waste after a digital TV transition : Material ﬂows and stocks. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 138, 142 –150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resconrec.2018.07.014 . Işıldar, A., Rene, E.R., van Hullebusch, E.D., Lens, P.N.L., 2017. Electronic waste as a secondary source of critical metals: management and recovery technologies. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 296 –312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.07.031 . Islam, T., Meade, N., 1997. The Di ﬀusion of Successive Generations of a Technology : A More General Model. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 56, 49 –60. Kahhat, R., Williams, E., 2012. Materials ﬂow analysis of e-waste : Domestic ﬂows and exports of used computers from the United States. Resources, Conserv. Recycl. 67,67–74.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2012.07.008 . Kalmykova, Y., Sadagopan, M., Rosado, L., 2018. Circular economy –from review of theories and practices to development of implementation tools. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 190 –201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.10.034 . Kasulaitis, B.V., Babbitt, C.W., Krock, A.K., 2019. Dematerialization and the circular economy dematerialization and the circular economy comparing strategies to reducematerial impacts of theConsumer electronic product ecosystem. J. Ind. Ecol. 00, 1–14.https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12756 . Kiddee, P., Naidu, R., Wong, M.H., 2013. Electronic waste management approaches : An overview. Waste Manag. 33, 1237 –1250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2013. 01.006 . Kohler, A., Erdmann, L., 2004. Expected environmental impacts of pervasive computing. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess. 10, 831 –852. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10807030490513856 . Kucharavy, D., De Guio, R., 2015. Application of logistic growth curve. Procedia Eng. 131, 280 –290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2015.12.390 . Kucharavy, D., De Guio, R., 2011. Logistic substitution model and technological fore- casting. Procedia Eng. 9, 402 –416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2011.03.129 . Lefkovitch, L.P., 2018. The study of population growth in organisms grouped by stages. Biometrics 21, 1 –18. Li, B., Yang, J., Lu, B., Song, X., 2015. Estimation of retired mobile phones generation in China : A comparative study on methodology. Waste Manag. 35, 247 –254. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2014.09.008 . Lu, B., Liu, J., Yang, J., Li, B., 2015. The environmental impact of technology innovation on WEEE management by Multi-Life Cycle Assessment. J. Clean. Prod. 89, 148 –158.S. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 9 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.11.004 . Marchetti, C., Nakicenovic, N., 1979. The Dynamics of Energy Systems and the Logistic Substitution Model . Mars, C., Nafe, C., Linnell, J., 2016. The Electronics Recycling Landscape. Retrieved from. . https://www.sustainabilityconsortium.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/ TSC_Electronics_Recycling_Landscape_Report-1.pdf . Meyer, P.S., Yung, J.W., Ausubel, J.H., 1999. A Primer on Logistic Growth and Substitution : The Mathematics of the Loglet Lab Software. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 61, 1 –23. Miller, T.R., Duan, H., Gregory, J., Kahhat, R., Kirchain, R., 2016. Quantifying domestic used electronics ﬂows using a combination of material ﬂow methodologies: a US case study. Environ. Sci. Technol. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b00079 . Nakatani, J., Moriguchi, Y., 2014. Time-series product and substance ﬂow analyses of end-of-life electrical and electronic equipment in China. Waste Manag. 34, 489 –497. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2013.11.004 . Norton, J.A., Bass, F.M., 1987. A di ﬀusion theory model of adoption and substitution for successive generations of HIGH-TECHNOLOGY Products. Manage. Sci. 33 . O’Connor, M.P., Zimmerman, J.B., Anastas, P.T., Plata, D.L., 2016. A strategy for material supply chain sustainability: enabling a circular economy in the electronics industry through green engineering. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4, 5879 –5888. https://doi.org/ 10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b01954 . Oguchi, M., Kameya, T., 2008. Product ﬂow analysis of various consumer durables in Japan. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 52, 463 –480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec. 2007.06.001 . Oregon E-Cycles Program, 2018. Oregon E-Cycles Collections Determination for 2018 . Perera, C., Liu, C.H., Jayawardena, S., 2015. The Emerging Internet of Things Marketplace From an Industrial Perspective : A Survey. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. 3, 585 –598. https://doi.org/10.1109/TETC.2015.2390034 . Petridis, N.E., Stiakakis, E., Petridis, K., Dey, P., 2016. Estimation of computer waste quantities using forecasting techniques. J. Clean. Prod. 112, 3072 –3085. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.119 . Powell, J.T., Chertow, M.R., 2018. Quantity, Components, and Value of Waste Materials Landﬁlled in the United States. J. of Industrial Ecol. 0, 1 –14.https://doi.org/10. 1111/jiec.12752 . Rahmani, M., Nabizadeh, R., Yaghmaeian, K., Hossien, M.A., Yunesian, M., 2014. Estimation of waste from computers and mobile phones in Iran. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 87, 21 –29.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2014.03.009 . Reike, D., Vermeulen, W.J.V., Witjes, S., 2018. The circular economy : New or Refurbished as CE 3. 0? —Exploring Controversies in the Conceptualization of the Circular Economy through a Focus on History and Resource Value Retention Options.Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 246 –264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017. 08.027 . Ryen, E.G., Babbitt, C.W., Tyler, A.C., Babbitt, G.A., 2014. Community ecologyperspectives on the structural and functional evolution of consumer electronics. J. Ind. Ecol. 18, 708 –721. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12130 . Scalbi,  S., Fantin, V., Antolini, F., 2017. Environmental assessment of new technologies : Production of a Quantum Dots-Light Emitting Diode. J. Clean. Prod. 142, 3702 –3718. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.098 . Tansel, B., 2017. From electronic consumer products to e-wastes : Global outlook, waste quantities, recycling challenges. Environ. Int. 98, 35 –45.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. envint.2016.10.002 . Tsai, B., 2013. Modeling di ﬀusion of multi-generational LCD TVs while considering generation-speci ﬁc price e ﬀects and consumer behaviors. Technovation 33, 345–354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2013.05.002 . Tseng, F., Cheng, A., Peng, Y., 2009. Assessing market penetration combining scenario analysis, Delphi, and the technological substitution model : The case of the OLED TVmarket. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 76, 897 –909. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. techfore.2009.02.003 . U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2016. Electronic Products Generation and Recycling in the United States, 2013 and 2014 . U S Environmental Protection Agency, 2011. Electronics Waste Management in the United States Through 2009 . Vanegas, P., Peeters, J.R., Cattrysse, D., Tecchio, P., Ardente, F., Mathieux, F., Dewulf, W., Duﬂou, J.R., 2018. Ease of disassembly of products to support circular economy strategies. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 323 –334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resconrec.2017.06.022 . Wang, X., Gaustad, G., 2012. Prioritizing material recovery for end-of-life printed circuit boards. Waste Manag. 32, 1903 –1913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2012.05. 005. Wang, F., Huisman, J., Stevels, A., Peter, C., 2013. Enhancing e-waste estimates : Improving data quality by multivariate Input –Output Analysis. Waste Manag. 33, 2397 –2407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2013.07.005 . Yang, Y., Williams, E., 2009. Logistic model-based forecast of sales and generation of obsolete computers in the U.S. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 76, 1105 –1114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2009.03.004 . Yu, J., Williams, E., Ju, M., Yang, Y., 2010. Forecasting Global Generation of Obsolete Personal Computers. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44, 3232 –3237 . Zeng, X., Mathews, J.A., Li, J., 2018. Urban Mining of E-Waste is Becoming More Cost- Eﬀective Than Virgin Mining. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52, 4835 –4841. https://doi.org/ 10.1021/acs.est.7b04909 . Zlamparet, G.I., Ijomah, W., Miao, Y., Awasthi, A.K., Zeng, X., Li, J., 2017. Remanufacturing strategies : A solution for WEEE problem. J. Clean. Prod. 149,126–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.02.004 . Zlamparet, G.I., Tan, Q., Stevels, A.B., Li, J., 2018. Resource conservation approached with an appropriate collection and upgrade-remanufacturing for used electronicproducts. Waste Manag. 73, 78 –86.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.11.053 .S. Althaf, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104362 10 

