Waste generation, wealth and GHG emissions from the waste sector: Is Denmark on the path towards circular economy? Cosimo Magazzinoa,Marco Meleb,Nicolas Schneiderc,Samuel Asumadu Sarkodied,⁎ aRoma Tre University, Italy bUniversity of Teramo, Italy cParis 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne University, France dNord University Business School , Post Box 1490, 8049 Bodø, Norway HIGHLIGHTS •In-depth assessment of Municipal Solid Waste Sustainability is presented. •We assess the effect of wealth and urban sprawl on sustainable waste manage- ment. •We observe that urbanization is the backbone of GHG emissions from waste. •Weﬁnd a gradual shift from linear econ- omy to circular economy. •Other countries can learn from Denmark's path towards sustainable waste management.GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT abstract article info Article history: Received 11 July 2020 Received in revised form 24 August 2020 Accepted 17 September 2020 Available online 25 September 2020 Editor: Daniel CW Tsang Keywords: Municipal solid waste Breitung-Candelon spectral Granger-causality Waste sector Recycling Environmental sustainability Machine learningMunicipal solid waste  is one of the most urgent issues associated with economic growth and urban pop- ulation. When untreated, it generates harmful and toxic substances spreading out into the soils. When treated, they produce an important amount of Greenhouse Gas  emissions directly contributing to global warming. With its promising path to sustainability, the Danish case is of high interest since estimated results are thought to bring useful information for policy purposes. Here, we exploit the most recent and available data period  and investigate the causal relationship between MSW generation per capita, income level, urban- ization, and GHG emissions from the waste sector in Denmark. We use an experiment based on Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks and the Breitung-Candelon Spectral Granger-causality test to understand how the variables, object of the study, manage to interact within a complex ecosystem such as the environment and waste. Through numer- ous tests in Machine Learning, we arrive at results that imply how economic growth, identi ﬁable by changes in per capita GDP, affects the acceleration and the velocity of the neural signal with waste emissions. We observe a periodical shift from the traditional linear economy to a circular economy that has important policy implications. © 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. This i s an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license . 1. Introduction The impact of COVID-19 pandemic on municipal waste accentuates the importance of sustainable waste management ( Sarkodie and Owusu, 2020 ). The UN Conference of Sustainable DevelopmentScience of the Total Environment 755  142510 ⁎Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: cosimo.magazzino@uniroma3.it , mmele@unite.it , Nicolas.Schneider@etu.univ-paris1.fr , asumadusarkodiesamuel@yahoo.com . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142510 0048-9697/© 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Science of the Total Environment journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv  parties clari ﬁed the de ﬁnition of Sustainable Development  . It is de ﬁned as one that meets our present needs while allowing future generations to address their own. Meanwhile, the concept of Green Growth  has emerged as a low-carbon and climate compatible development pattern. Challenges with Municipal Waste  stands at the core of these comprehensive reforms since the effectiveness of the waste management sharply in ﬂu- ences environmental quality. One reason is that global material use is expected to double by 2060, with obvious dramatic consequences on human health and the environment . When not treated , Municipal Solid Waste  generates harmful and toxic substances through its direct re- lease into soils1. When treated , it produces an important amount of polluting emissions 2re- sponsible for global warming ( IPCC, 2007 ;Bogner et al., 2008 ;Clarke et al., 2019 ). Accordingly, it has been underlined that MSW must be the subject of important ex-post management, but also important ex- ante regulations . In line with a sustainable path, minimising waste through recovery or turning waste into energy are key areas in which circular business models3can operate  . Facing this challenge, the European Union  Sixth Environment Action Programme  listed waste reduction as one of its most urgent priorities . Thus, EU policies have been promoting sanitary land ﬁll and waste recovery for a decade . These global measures ﬁnd their or- igin in a current concern: the total quantity of MSW per capita increased by 54% in the EU15 over the 1980 –2005 period ( Sjöström and Östblom, 2010 ). And this trend holds also for Denmark, where the per capita MSW increased by 43.4%4between 1994 and 2018 . Looking at the per capita income, this indicator recorded a 33% growth over the same period . However, the environmental costs related to MSW might still have decreased due to national waste man- agement policies. Indeed, the Danish government has adopted several policy measures in parallel to the EU's effort: reducing land ﬁlling, in- creasing processing for recycling, and improving composting5 . As a result, over the period 1993 –2018, municipal waste recovery increased from 80% to 99%; composting in- creased from 9% to 17% and land ﬁlling6decreased from 20% to 1% . Danish households are also large food waste producers in Europe, totalling 237,000 t annually . Hence, in 2011, the Danish Ministry of the Environment established an “Initia- tive Group Against Food Waste ”composed of stakeholders from public and private sectors and aiming at achieving food waste reduction . Finally, waste-to-energy  processes have been strongly promoted across the territory through non-pro ﬁts WTE plants owned by municipalities . The effective im- pact of these policies appears fruitful: GHG emissions from the wastesector recorded a 32%7decrease over the period 1994 –2017. Denmark  is even considered as one of the most advanced waste management systems, making even extra income from the import and disposal of waste from neighbouring coun- tries . On the other hand, the last OECD report on the environment ranked Denmark as the second largest MSW producer per capita among OECD countries . With 771 kg percapita, this economy is well above the OECD average estimated at 524 kg per capita. As in most economies, MSW generation continues to increase in Denmark , in- dicating that this country has not yet managed to decouple waste gen- eration from socio-economic developments. Facing such a burning environmental paradox, the case of Denmark is of high interest. Before designing any recommendations, understanding the nature of the growth-environmental degradation relationship is mandatory. Aﬁrst strand of the literature examined the determinants of MSW gen- eration at various levels ( Johnstone and Labonne, 2004 ;Karousakis, 2007 ;Chalak et al., 2016 ). Upon the identi ﬁed key drivers, the role of in- come turned out to be considerable but sensitive to the country's stage of development . Evidence of a progressive de- linking process in advanced economies has been early noted by the OECD. In theory, such decoupling phenomenon may occur when the elasticity of the MSW generation indicator in relation to per capita in- come is positive , before becom- ing negative  . Only in that case does income cease to be a robust driver to environmental degradation. In practice, its empirical assessment has been made using the well- known Environmental Kuznets Curve  approach ( Kuznets, 1955 ; Grossman and Krueger, 1991 ). While many times documented in the literature, generalizing the inverted U-shaped curve for high-income countries is still con ﬂicting. 8This is notably due to the variety of meth- odologies employed and sample selected, calling for further inquiry into the waste-income nexus using a more consistent empirical strategy. A second branch of the literature is constituted of studies relying on the EKC framework to investigate the link between economic growth and environmental pollution ( Grossman and Krueger, 1991 ;Sarkodie and Strezov, 2019 ;Stern and Common, 2001 ;Bilgili et al., 2016 ). Since sectoral analyses have taken a growing place in this research ﬁeld, a few published works explored the determinants of GHG emissions from the waste sector, inducing worthwhile policy implications ( Lee et al., 2016 ;Dong et al., 2017 ). In practice, the waste sector is said to have high potential in curbing environmental pollution despite an im- portant carbon footprint . Hence, numerous strategies for GHG abatement in the waste sector have been proposed at different locations: land ﬁll extension and energy recovery system for waste dis- posal ; higher energy recovery  ef ﬁciency from waste incineration for combined heat and power generation ( Yang et al., 2012 for China; Yi et al., 2014 for Daejeon, Korea); Food waste treatment including thermal treat- ment, compost and anaerobic digestion ( Bernstad and Jansen, 2012 for Sweden). Nonetheless, an in-depth review of the literature highlights that none of these studies examined the relationship among MSW genera- tion, income and GHG emissions within a single framework.9Yet, it is known that a neighbouring assessment on the interrelationships1Mainly chlorinated solvents, heavy metals, polycyclic aromatic and aromatic hydro- carbons, and vinyl chlorides. 2According to the World Resource Institute , methane gas represents 15% of the total GHG emissions and is also the main contributor to GHG emissions in the wastesector. 3The OECD  de ﬁnes a circular economy as a system which maximises the value of the materials and products that circulate within the economy. Allowing for sharp re-sources preservation and environmental footprint reduction, circular business modelsare attracting a growing attention from researchers, governments, and industries. For anin-depth assessment on the potential of waste recovery and waste-to-energy under a cir-cular economy environment in Europe, see Malinauskaite et al.  . 4MSW generation per capita increased from 537.7 kg per capita to 771.1 kg per capita over the 1994 –2018 period . 5In fact, waste is taxed in Denmark to promote recycling over the waste incineration and land ﬁlling . 6By contrast, land ﬁlling remains the main waste disposal method in OECD countries, indicating a considerable step in the sustainable direction for Denmark .7GHG emissions from the waste sector recorded a decrease from 1699.9 to 1145.9 thousand tonnes of CO2 equivalent over the 1994 –2017 period . 8For instance, Mazzanti and Zoboli  andMazzanti  carried an empirical analysis on EU countries and concluded that estimated waste elasticities were far fromconﬁrming the EKC hypothesis. Similarly, Cole et al.  found no turning point for 13 OECD countries. 9In fact, Lee et al.  andMagazzino et al.  estimated two distinct models . In the ﬁrst model, they assessed the link among per capita GDP and MSW generation; and in the second model, they explored the relation-ship between total MSW, recovery waste generation, and GHG emissions from the wastesector.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 2 among energy consumption, Gross Domestic Product , and CO 2 emissions has been extensively performed10(Lozano and Gutierrez, 2008 ;Magazzino, 2016 ;Magazzino and Cerulli, 2019 ;Sarkodie, 2021 ). Being of central importance in growth theory and providing far- reaching policy implications, linking waste-GDP and GDP- environmental pollution data in a unique estimation model can repre- sent a fruitful research direction. If it is con ﬁrmed that GHG emissions from the waste sector are both driven by per capita MSW and income, then focusing on these key factors would help policymakers mitigating global warming. Reciprocally, if income is identi ﬁed as the main deter- minant of waste generation, then adequate measures can be imple- mented. Accordingly, this is where our paper ﬁnds the ﬁrst of its ﬁve contributions. Looking with closer scrutiny, most published works have focused on large groups of advanced economies  including often hetero- geneous panel members in a single estimation. Due to the well-known waste data constraint,11it is not clear that the results obtained based on wide income groups can be generalized for each member. Besides, OECD and EU datasets may differ depending on the national waste clas- siﬁcations . Yet, the knowledge on MSW with readily available waste statistics allow for single-country analysis.12While never studied in previous research, analysing the waste sector in Denmark stands as the second contribution of the pres- ent work. Third, studies on the waste sector remain sporadic and limited de- spite its signi ﬁcant global warming contributor. The Sustainable devel- opment goal 12 accentuates the importance of sustainable production and consumption , hence, a part of the debate on Sustainable Development  should focus on waste management. Accordingly, this paper follows Domingos et al.  and contributes to the literature in analysing the waste sector. A fourth novelty aspect is methodological. This research relies on a Machine Learning  methodology through the Arti ﬁcial Neural Net- works . Our empirical approach differs from the great majority of existing analyses on this topic. Nonetheless, the few studies that used ML models on waste data failed to include additional variables within a multivariate predictive causality framework ( Kannangara et al., 2018 ;Meza et al., 2019 ;Pan et al., 2019 ). Beyond a simple fore- casting purpose, the present study relies on an innovative algorithm to perform a strong causal analysis among multiple variables. Finally, urbanization is included as an additional explanatory factor to land and air degradation. This last original aspect is based on the household utility maximization proposed by Kinnaman and Fullerton  . The authors identi ﬁed a vector of demographic characteristics towards which the use of household MSW is dependent, and notably the fact to live in urban areas or not. Then, Johnstone and Labonne  adapted this model with macroeconomic data to assess the de- terminants of MSW generation for 30 OECD countries. To do so, they rely on the proportion of the urban population. A more urbanized pop- ulation is said to exert growing pressure on urban resources and envi- ronment . Undoubtedly, this factor is thought to be a non-negligible driver of MSW generation and GHG emissions. Hence, there is a point in incorpo- rating it within our framework.Overall, this paper aims at performing an in-depth assessment on Denmark: a case study characterized by a promising  path to MSW sustainability. With ﬁve distinct novelty aspects, this research seeks to contribute to the literature. We exploit the most recent and available data period  and investigate the causal relation- ship between per capita GDP, urbanization, MSW generation per capita, and GHG emissions from the waste sector in Denmark. FollowingMagazzino et al.  , this study applies two independent empirical strategies: a time-series analysis (the Breitung-Candelon Spectral Granger-causality test) and a Machine Learning approach (Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks experiments), useful for policy formulation. Besides this introduction, the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature. Section 3 introduces and de- scribes the data and methodology employed. Section 4 shows the em- pirical results and discussion of the results. Finally, Section 5 provides concluding remarks and careful policy recommendations. 2. Literature review The literature on the relationship between economic activity and en- vironmental degradation can be divided into two main components. Theﬁrst focuses on the economic growth-environmental pollution nexus (mainly carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions). The second concen- trates on the link between economic growth and land degradation . In the third part, this review highlights studies on green supply processes and a speci ﬁc focus is made on waste treat- ment within circular models. Being nonetheless exhaustive, this survey emphasizes the suitability of assessing the Danish case and shed light on the key gaps in the literature. 2.1. Economic growth-environmental pollution nexus As mentioned previously, the relationship between economic activ- ity and environmental pollution has been abundantly studied using the EKC framework. The origins of this assessment can be traced back to the seminal study from Grossman and Krueger  . When con ﬁrmed, this hypothesis claims that environmental pollution would ﬁrst increase with income, and then decreases as GDP grows and technological prog- ress emerges . From a policy standpoint, it is of high interest to know what relation character- izes the GDP-CO 2emissions nexus for a country ( Magazzino and Cerulli, 2019 ). Despite abundant empirical examinations, studies differ from each other in terms of methodologies, time periods, and samples (Acaravci and Ozturk, 2010 ;Bowden and Payne, 2009 ;Bilgili et al., 2016 ). This review focuses on our country of interest: Denmark. Since the economic growth-waste generation nexus is the explicit aim ofthis paper, we select the only relevant information related to previous GDP-environmental pollution investigations. Nonetheless, an extensive overview can be found in Bilgili et al.  . 13 The EKC is validated in Acaravci and Ozturk  for 19 European  countries , and using Autoregressive Distrib- uted Lag  bounds cointegration analysis ( Pesaran and Shin, 1998 ;Pesaran et al., 2001 ) and Error Correction Model . Subse- quently, the EKC is supported in Ben Jebli et al.  for 25 OECD (Or- ganization for Economic Cooperation and Development) countries . While results provided little evidence supporting the existence of the EKC hypothesis for Artic countries , Bilgili et al.  conﬁrmed the EKC hypothesis for 17 OECD countries , through Fully Modi ﬁed Ordinary Least Squares  and Dynamic Ordinary Least Squares  estimations. Overall, despite not explicitly providing support for the EKC hypothesis, Saidi and Hammami  showed that CO 2emissions have a strong10Outside the waste framework, the empirical relationship between GDP, CO2 emissions and various sources of energy has been extensively tested. See Pao and Tsai  ;Tiwari  ,Farhani and Ben Rejeb  ;Magazzino  ;Kasman and Duman  ; Munir et al.  for the relevant literature on this topic, which is not the explicit aim of this paper. 11The literature lacks single-country case studies mainly because of the data constraint. Waste classi ﬁcations may vary across countries and care must be taken when working with data reported before the 1990s. For an interesting discussion on the data quality issuerelated to the waste sector, see Mazzanti et al.  . 12Beforehand, Mazzanti  used the information available at that time and investi- gated the waste-GDP nexus for 15 EU countries. Due to a time-limited dataset, the authors stated that his research would only provide “preliminary evi- dence ”. Hence, the current available statistics allow us to make a step forward here.13Broad critical surveys are also presented in Dasgupta et al.  ,Dinda  ,a n d Stern  .C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 3 negative impact on per capita GDP for 58 countries (including Denmark). Inversely, the EKC hypothesis is rejected in Shaﬁei and Salim  for 29 OECD countries  while using the Stochastic Impacts by Regression on Population, Af ﬂuence, and Technology  model. As in Beşe and Kalayci  who applied ARDL, GC and Toda-Yamamoto c a u s a l i t y tests, the EKC is rejected for Denmark, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Focusing on a neighbouring research issue, Silva et al.  applied Impulse Response Function  models and showed that income and CO2emissions variables are overly sensitive to changes in the share of renewable energy sources in the energy mix for Denmark. Despite not conﬁrming the EKC hypothesis, such results underline the persisting linkages among energy, income, and pollution. Overall, previous re- search demonstrated that extracting renewable fuel from MSW helps to reduce GHG emissions from the waste sector in the EU ( Domingos et al., 2017 ).Table 1 summarizes the main information of the empirical EKC literature. 2.2. Municipal solid waste-income nexus MSW is a major component of total waste generation and is obvi- ously linked to land degradation. Hence, the EKC framework has been extensively employed to inspect per capita MSW-GDP relationship. Nevertheless, income-land degradation nexus remains under- investigated. As for GDP-CO 2studies, the Danish case appears only con- sidered through multi-country examinations so far.14 Theﬁrst strand of studies explored the determinants of MSW gener- ation, underlining the key role played by income in MSW generation. The seminal contribution from Johnstone and Labonne  focused on 30 OECD countries  and investigated the macro- economic determinants of household solid waste generation. Applying panel estimation over the period 1980 –2000, the results clearly showed that economic activity and population density are two robust drivers of solid waste. This ﬁnding is in line with Karousakis  who per- formed a neighbouring examination including a waste legislation index on the same sample. Empirical results showed that MSW in- creases linearly with income. While the time-invariant policy index is not signi ﬁcant, urbanization displayed an even stronger effect on waste generation. Other research works extended this examinationand con ﬁrmed explicitly the existence of a turning point between in- come and waste. Arbulú et al.  explored the effects of tourism  on MSW generation in 16 EU coun- tries  over the period 1997 –2010. The authors pro- vided tools for tourism management policies and supported the existence of the EKC curve between MSW and income. However, other studies failed to con ﬁrm the existence of the EKC be- tween waste and income. Cole et al.  collected data on 13 OECDcountries  to examine the relationship between per capita income and a wide range of environmental indicators (nitro- gen dioxide, carbon dioxide, methane, and municipal waste). Results of the panel analysis failed to support the EKC relationship, indicating no existing turning point. This is in line with Mazzanti and Zoboli  who considered 18 EU countries  and examined the waste-income relationship over the period 1995 –2000 but rejected the EKC. Subsequently, Mazzanti  estimated waste elasticities with respect to income for 15 EU countries . Exploiting data over the period 1997 –2001, results rejected the exis- tence of hypothetical turning point among variables. Overall, Mazzanti and Zoboli  extended their analysis to 25 EU countries (including Denmark) and found no de-linking process between ﬁnal consumption household expenditure and waste generation per capita, although elas- ticity to income drivers appeared lower than in their previous study. Baalbaki and Marrouch  examined the relationship between MSW and GDP per capita for 33 OECD countries . The authors employed Wang  'sﬂexible polynomial model with data spanning the 1995 –2012 period. Despite evidence of a downward sloping relationship among variables, the results rejected the EKC hy- pothesis. Table 2 summarizes the main information of this literature. 2.3. Green logistics indicators-environmental degradation nexus studies and waste management within circular business models Logistic management is a crucial part of the supply chain manage- ment. This refers to a set of integrated actions improving inventory stor- age, material handling, freight transport and information processing . Even though logistics is known as a signi ﬁcant contributor to economic growth, its interlinkages with environmental degradation remain ambiguous and under-estimated. The seminal study from Khan et al.  shed light on an original prospect: carbon emissions may also affect adversely economic growth. As awareness be- comes stronger, customers are more conscious regarding green prod- ucts and sustainability, with governments being more aggressive to implement environmental policies. Interestingly, customer pressure can impact the ﬁrm's adoption of green supply chain management  practices . Hence, speci ﬁc literature linking green logistic operations and economic and environmental indicators have emerged. Khan et al.  considered 43 different economies  and claimed that logistics operations deplete en- ergy and fossil fuel, while the amount of fossil fuel and non-green en- ergy sources has a substantial adverse impact on the sustainability of the atmosphere. With a special focus on emerging Asian countries, Khan et al.  showed that logistics operations –especially the ef ﬁ- ciency of customs clearance processes, the quality of logistics services, and trade-related infrastructure –positively impact per capita income, value-added manufacturing, and trade openness. Nevertheless, greater logistics activities are negatively associated with social and environ- mental issues, including climate change, global warming, carbon pollu- tion and ozone poisoning.14By contrast, some single-country analyses on neighbouring countries are available. For as p e c i ﬁc assessment in Switzerland, see Jaligot and Chenal  andMagazzino et al.  . Evidence for the US case are provided in Lee et al.  .Table 1 Summary of previous studies on the relationship between GDP and CO 2emissions including Denmark. Source: our elaborations. Author Countries Sample period Methodology Pollution/GDP data EKC for Denmark Acaravci and Ozturk  19 EU countries 1960 –2005 ARDL, ECM CO 2emissions/GDP per capita Yes Ben Jebli et al.  25 OECD countries 1980 –2009 FMOLS, DOLS CO 2emissions/GDP Yes Shaﬁei and Salim  29 OECD countries 1980 –2011 STIRPAT model, GC CO 2emissions/GDP per capita No Baek  Artic countries 1960 –2010 ARDL CO 2emissions/GDP per capita Yes Bilgili et al.  17 OECD countries 1977 –2010 FMOLS, DOLS CO 2emissions/GDP per capita Yes Domingo et al.  EU countries 1995 –2012 ARDL GHG emissions from the waste sector/GDP No Beşe and Kalayci  Denmark, Spain, and the UK 1960 –2014 ARDL, GC, TY CO 2emissions/GDP No Notes: EU: European Union. OECD: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. ARDL: Autoregressive Distributed Lag bounds; ECM: Error C orrection Model; FMOLS: Fully Modi ﬁed Ordinary Least Square estimation; DOLS: Dynamic Ordinary Least Square estimation; STIRPAT model: Stochastic Impacts by Regression on Populatio n, Afﬂuence, and Technology model; GC: Granger Causality test; GMM: Generalized Method of Moments; TY: Toda and Yamamoto causality test.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 4 Far from being a coincidence, the nature of MSW disposal plays a leading role in the path to sustainability. This allows for sharp resources preservation and environmental footprint reduction, circular business models coincide with waste treatment operations . Thus, interesting literature is emerging, underlining the potential of waste re- covery for the circular economy. Nonetheless, D'Adamo et al.  ar- gued that the economic feasibility of such a model is con ﬁrmed for a few scenarios only in Italy. Focusing on the transport sector, the authors con- cluded that the use of green gas is capable of reducing GHG emissions, but the economic cost of the environmental externality (i.e., 226 €/cer- tiﬁcates of emission of biofuel in consumption ) remains lower than the value released by the current Italian decree . Van Fan et al.  proposed an integrated design of waste manage- ment systems under a circular environment using P-graph (bipartite graphical optimisation tool). The authors showed that each ton of MSW processed could avoid 411 kg of GHG emissions (expressed in CO2equivalent), besides, it could achieve an estimated pro ﬁto f4 2 €/ ton of MSW treated. Looking at the case of Croatia, Luttenberger  built a relevant review on national waste policies, and provided careful measures to strengthen Croatia's path towards a circular economy. Based on this review, an in-depth assessment on the Danish case mayﬁll a crucial gap in the literature, while presenting accurate ﬁndings useful for researchers and policymakers. Hence, this paper investigates the causal relationship between per capita GDP, MSW generation per capita, and GHG emissions from the waste sector in Denmark. Following Magazzino et al.  , a novel time-series analysis coupled with a Machine Learning approach is utilized. 3. Data collection and empirical strategy 3.1. Data collection To implement our model, we derived the following data for Denmark: Total Municipal Solid Waste Generation i s expressed in kilograms per capita; per capita GDP i se x p r e s s e d in Purchasing Power Parity  constant 2017 international $; GHG emissions from the waste sector are expressed in thousand tonnes of CO2equivalent . As a proxy for urbanization, we use urban pop- ulation, expressed in % of total population .TMWG and GGWS are taken from the OECD Environment Statistics database.15GDPp and Urban data are derived from the World Development Indicators database.16According to the OECD , MSW indicator correspondsto the total waste collected by or on behalf of the municipalities. It incor- porates waste originating from households, and small commercial activ- ities. GHG emissions are constituted of carbon dioxide (CO 2from energy use and industrial processes) and methane emissions that are produced by the waste sector . The data cover the period 1994 –2018. The choice of the starting period was constrained by waste and GHG emissions data availability, often missing or unavailable before 1995 for most of the advanced economies. 3.2. Empirical methodology The causality relationship expressed in econometric modeling is now tested through the ANNs approach. According to Pearl  andKocaoglu et al.  , we develop Feed-forward Neural Networks as a Structural Causal Models , to verify how (in a predictive way) TMWG ,GDPp ,a n d Urban cause GGWS in Denmark. ANNs are made up of elementary computational units  known as Processing Units . Neurons are combined according to different architectures: for example, they can be organized in layers , or they can have a topology in which each neu- ron is connected to all the others . We mainly refer to layered networks, consisting of the input layer, with nneurons equal to the number of network inputs; the hidden layer, with one or more hidden  layers consisting of mneurons; the out- put layer, with pneurons equal to the number of desired outputs. The connection methods allow us to distinguish between two types of archi- tectures. In feedback architectures, the presence of connections be- tween neurons of the same layer or between neurons of the previous layer creates a feedback connection. In feed-forward architectures, the connections between the levels are interconnected and do not generate minimum levels. Thus, the signal is transmitted only to neurons belong- ing to the next layer. McCulloch and Pitts  proposed the repre- sentation of the ANNs reported in Fig. 1 . Each neuron receives ninput signals from the other neurons (the vector x), through connections of intensity w. The input signals are consolidated into a postsynaptic potential y, which is the weighted sum of the inputs. The sum function, thus, calculates the activation value, which is then transformed into the output Fb ya n appropriate transfer or activation function. Neurons in the input layer have no input. Their activation status corresponds to the data input to the network. They do not perform any calculation, and the activation function transfers the input value to the network without changing it. The operational capacity of a network, i.e. its knowledge, is contained in the synapses, i.e. the weights of the input connections of each neuron. The latter assumes the correct values thanks to training. The NNs are not directly programmed but explicitly trained, through a learning algo- rithm to solve a given task, with a process that leads to learning through15Per capita MSW generation and GHG emissions from the waste sector data are avail- able at: https://data.oecd.org/environment.htm . 16Per capita GDP and urban population data are available at: https://databank. worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators .Table 2 Summary of previous studies on the relationship between waste and GDP including Denmark.Source: our elaborations. Author Countries Sample period Methodology Waste/GDP data EKC for Denmark Cole et al.  13 OECD countries 1975 –1990 FE Municipal solid waste generation/GDP per capita, No Johnstone and Labonne 30 OECD countries 1980 –2000 FE Municipal solid waste generation per capita/GDP per capita – Mazzanti and Zoboli 18 EU countries 1995 –2000 RE, FE Municipal solid waste generation per capita/GDP per capita No Karousakis  30 OECD countries 1980 –2000 RE, FE Municipal solid waste generation/GDP per capita – Mazzanti  15 EU countries/28 EU countries1997 –2001/1995 –2000 FE Waste generation per capita/GDP per capita No/No Mazzanti and Zoboli 25 EU countries 1995 –2005 FE Municipal solid waste generation per capita/Final consumption expenditure of householdsNo Arbulú et al.  16 EU countries 1997 –2010 FE Municipal solid waste generation per capita/GDP per capita Yes Baalbaki and Marrouch 33 OECD countries 1995 –2012 FE Municipal solid waste generation per capita/GDP per capita No Notes: FE: ﬁxed effects model. RE: random effects model.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 5 experience. There are at least three types of learning: 1) supervised, 2) unsupervised, and 3) reinforcement. In the case of unsupervised learning, the network is trained only on an input set, without providing the corresponding output set. For supervised learning, however, it is necessary to identify a set of examples consisting of appropriate sam- ples of the inputs and the corresponding outputs to be presented to the network, so that it learns to represent them. Finally, reinforcement learning is used in cases where it is not possible to specify input- output patterns for supervised learning systems. Reinforcement is pro- vided to the system, which interprets it as a positive/negative signal on its behaviour, adjusting the parameters accordingly. The set of con- ﬁgurations used for learning the network constitutes the learning set, called the training set. Basically, we adopted an empirical strategy sim- ilar to Magazzino et al.  ,a n d Mele and Magazzino  . In the following analysis, we consider more complex ANNs than the one in Fig. 2 . Our ANN design has a multilayer structure (feed-forward multilayer, multilayer perceptron), and it is de ﬁned by Minput nodes, lacking the capacity for processing, associated with inputs xi∈R; a set of neurons organized in L≥2 layers, of which L−1 hidden layers and an exit layer, which provides the outputs network yi; a set of oriented and weighted arches that establish connections. The functions that rep- resent the ANNs can be expressed as: aj¼∑M i¼1wj,ixi−θj ð1Þzj¼ψaj/C0/C1 ð2Þ j¼1, ...,N ð3Þ y¼∑N j¼1vjzj¼∑N j¼1vjψ∑M i¼1wj,ixi−θj ! ¼∑N j¼1vjψwT jx−θj/C16/C17 ð4Þ where: xi:i-th input/s; wj,i: weight of the connection between the input iand the hidden neuron j; θj:h i d d e nn e u r o nt h r e s h o l d j; vj: weight of the connection between the neuron hidden jand the output neuron; ψ: activation function of the neurons of the hidden layer; zj: hidden neuron output j; aj: combination of signals input to the hidden neuron j; y: target wj=T. The activation function ψis usually supposed to be differentiable and sigmoidal. We can use two types of functions. The logistics function: ψctðÞ¼1 1þe−ct,c>0 ð5Þ or the hyperbolic tangent function: ψctðÞ¼ tanht 2/C18/C19 ¼1−e−t 1þe−t: ð6Þ Once the logical process for our ANNs has been constructed, we can use the same dataset of the time-series analysis. However, since the ANNs require an extensive dataset, we have also generated the ﬁrst- differences  and the logarithm  of the series. This procedure al- lows us to grasp the variation between the data of the same variable in a context, that of ML, in which the time-series loses importance. Our algorithm, constructed through the extension of the Oryx protocol, use a combination of data equal to 495948561.17They represent all the possible input-target combinations necessary to generate the neural processing process that generates the ﬁnal target. Subsequently, after building the neural process, we will proceed by testing the results ob- tained through the latest testing techniques on NN models. After applying the ANN algorithm, we access the hypothesis that Denmark is on the verge of achieving a circular economy —a situation where waste and pollution is eliminated through recycling, reusing and regeneration of natural resource capital. To test this, we utilize re- gression to examine the nexus, variable importance of projection to in- vestigate the impact of income level, waste generation and urban population on GHG emissions from waste sector. We ﬁnally apply the Breitung-Candelon Spectral Granger-causality to investigate the Fig. 1. A simple ANNs scheme.4 6 8 10 12 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 Year TMWG GDPp Urban GGWS Fig. 2. Municipal solid waste generation, real per capita GDP, urban population, and greenhouse gas from the waste sector in Denmark . Data on munic- ipal solid waste generation are expressed in kilograms per capita; per capita GDP is expressed in Purchasing Power Parity  constant 2017 international $; urban popula- tion is expressed in percentage  of the total population; Greenhouse gas emissions fromthe waste sector are expressed in thousand tonnes of CO 2equivalent. Sources: OECD and WDI data.17Result = DRn,k.I nt h i sc a s e , k, a positive integer, can also be greater than or equal to n.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 6 direction of causality in a frequency domain —useful for policy formula- tion. The empirical speci ﬁcation of the regression model can be expressed as: yt¼δ0þβxtþεt ð7Þ where ytdenotes the greenhouse gas from waste sector, δ0is the con- stant, xtrepresents the regressors namely total Municipal waste gener- ation, income level and urban population. βis the parameter to be estimated and εtis the error term in time t. Following the speci ﬁcation expounded in Sarkodie and Adom  , the variable importance of projection can be expressed as: VIP w¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ∑u w¼1SvZ Z2 vwhi ∑u v¼1Svvuuuuutð8Þ where VIP wdenotes the variable importance of projection, №is the number of independent variables, uis the number of dimensions ex- tracted using partial least squares algorithm, Zvwrepresents the weight of the variable importance of projection of input variable wand the number of dimensions vexplained by partial least squares algorithm, andSvdenotes the explained sum of squares. The VIPwalgorithm is crit- ical to explaining the in ﬂuence of total Municipal waste generation, in- come level and urban population in predicting the observed changes in GHG emissions attributed to the waste sector in Denmark. Contrary to the traditional Granger causality test employed in the extant literature, we adopt the Breitung-Candelon Spectral Granger- causality algorithm that has an advantage in the prediction of causal- effects along a speci ﬁc time-frequency, useful for waste control policy formulation. Here, we follow the speci ﬁcation presented in Breitung and Candelon  ;Sarkodie  to examine the direction of cau- sality. For brevity, the generic speci ﬁcation is presented in a VAR equa- tion as:lnxt¼δ1lnxt−1þ...þδplnxt−pþ∂1lnyt−1þ...þ∂plnyt−pþε1,t ð9Þ where xt|ytdenotes the causal effect between lnGHG and lnUP; lnGHG and lnTMWG; lnGHG and lnRPCGDP; lnTMWG and lnRPCGDP; and lnTMWG and lnUP. ln is the logarithmic transformation of the data se- ries to control for heteroskedasticity, δ|∂are parameters to be estimated, tis the time period, ε1,tis the error term and pdenotes the lags. To ob- tain an optimal lag-order for the frequency domain causality test, we utilize the pre-estimation syntax for vector autoregressive models that employ multiple reporting and selection indicators such as Akaike infor- mation criterion , ﬁnal prediction error , Hannan & Quinn in- formation criterion  and Schwarz Bayesian information criterion . The resulting optimal lags selected for subsequent analysis are presented in Appendix B. The null hypothesis of Eq. is based on a bi- variate framework technique  that ytdoes not predict xt at a speci ﬁc frequency ω. Thus, a rejection of the null hypothesis at p- value < 0 .05stipulates ytpredicts xtin the frequency domain. 4. Empirical results As a preliminary check, descriptive statistics are presented in Table 3 . All variables except greenhouse gas exhibit a negative skew- ness, which indicates that the tail on the left side of the distribution is longer or wider. InFig. 2 , we show the evolution of the logarithmic transformations for the analyzed series. InTable 4 we report the results of two different time-series tests on unit root to determine the order of integration of the variables. InTable 4 , it can be observed that the four selected series are non- stationary at levels. The null hypothesis  of non-stationarity is rejected, in general. Table 5 represents the summary of the dataset used in the Oryx pro- cessing of our ANNs. The variables used are 12, of which 11 represent the input process, and 1 is the generated target. InFig. 3 , we report the behaviour of the instances through a pie chart elaborated by the protocol.Table 3 Descriptive statistics. Variable Mean Median SD Skewness Kurtosis Range IQR 10-Trim TMWG 6.5571 6.6047 0.1339 −0.7705 2.5087 0.4654 0.1726 6.573 GDPp 10.8202 10.8385 0.0760 −0.7587 2.7957 0.2879 0.0783 10.830 Urban 4.4563 4.4555 0.0122 0.2274 1.4909 0.0338 0.0237 4.456GGWS 7.1930 7.1696 0.1455 0.0842 1.5604 0.4498 0.2740 7.191 Notes: SD: standard deviation; IQR: inter-quartile range; 10-Trim: 10% trimmed mean. Sources: our calculations on OECD and WDI data. Table 4 Results for unit roots and stationarity tests. Variable Unit root and stationarity tests NP InterceptNP Intercept and trendERS InterceptERS Intercept and trend TMWG −0.9738 −6.1393 −1.1827 −2.0641  GDPp 0.9199 −7.1426 −0.4621 −2.0657  Urban 0.3059 −94.2148 ⁎⁎⁎ −1.6743 ⁎ −2.8326  GGWS −0.5767 −8.7074 −0.8634 −2.6467  Notes: NP: Ng-Perron Modi ﬁed test; ERS: Elliott-Rothenberg-Stock DF-GLS test. When it is required, the lag length is chosen according to the Schwarz Bayesian Information Crit erion . For NP tests MZa statistics are reported; for ERS tests tstatistics are reported. 5% Critical Values are given in parentheses. ⁎⁎⁎p<0 . 0 1 . ⁎p<0 . 1 0 .C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 7 The instances of the ML process are equal to 47 whereas those representing the training are 29 . This result underlines how, compared to a choice of nprojects, our model chose 29 models out of 47 potentials. They are the ones that best suit the target. The result con- ﬁrms the goodness of the choice. The selection requests are 9 , therefore, the instances selected the best possible ANNs process gener- ated target, allowing us to continue the processing. The instances are 9  and represents the choice of numerous training models. Since it is the same and never less than the selection instances, this reinforces the previous ﬁndings. Finally, the number of unused instances is 0 , con ﬁrming the goodness of the model. In fact, no anomalous values –which would have invalidated the results –were generated.After observing the processing behaviour of the datasets in ML algo- rithm, we analyze the result of the Back-Propagation Neural Networks  presented in Fig. 4 . It represents the result of 96 possible con- structions of the ANNs. We chose the one that had the best neural trans- mission in the Mean Square Error  test . The graphical elaboration on the ANNs generated in Oryx with NN Design is depicted in Fig. 4 . The architecture of the ANNs reveals a com- plexity, represented by hidden neurons, of 15: 10: 8: 6: 3. The distribu- tion of the ANNs is of the hyperbolic tangent type. The yellow circles represent the scaling neurons, the blue circles the perceptron neurons, and the red one the unscaling neurons. The number of inputs is 11, and the number of outputs is 1. Each combination of the inputs gener- ated the variation of the GGWS , in a process in which there were no anomalous values. Therefore, the graph of ANNs can be read as the n combinations of inputs that generate a variation of the target through a hyperbolic combination, with a linear result about the target. After building the ANNs, we proceed through numerous tests that may validate the model. These tests represent the only way for the op- erator to know the probability that there is a better algorithm different from the one chosen in the initial phase. Theﬁrst phase of the model algorithm's goodness begins with the analysis of the Perform Training. The Quasi-Newton method is used Fig. 3. Instances pie chart. Source: our elaborations. Fig. 4. ANNs results. Source: our elaborations in NN Design Software on Oryx.Table 5 Variables bars chart.Source: our elaborations. Fig. 5. Quasi-Newton method algorithm errors history. Source: our elaborations.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 8 here for training. It is based on Newton's method, but it does not require calculation of second derivatives. Instead, the Quasi-Newton method computes an approximation of the inverse Hessian at each iteration of the algorithm, by only using gradient information. Fig. 5 shows the training and selection errors in each iteration. The blue line represents the training error, while the orange one is the selec- tion error. The initial value of the training error is 1.75489, and its ﬁnal value after 13 epochs is 0.045617. The initial value of the selection error is 1.84954, and its ﬁnal value after 13 epochs is 0.15654. The downward trend of both error assessments highlights how our strategy turned out to be ideal for the ANNs elaboration process. Next, we run the Per- formed Order Selection  test. The best selection is achieved by using a model whose complexity is the most appropriate to produce an adequate ﬁt of the data. The order selection algorithm is responsible forﬁnding the optimal number of neurons in the network. Incremental order is used here as an order selection algorithm in the model selec- tion. Fig. 6 shows the error's history for the different subsets during the incremental order selection process. The blue line shows the train- ing error, while the orange line symbolizes the selection error. Both the training error and the selection error decrease with increas- ing order. Only at order number 9, we observe a minimal increase in the output error. In this level, the training error is only 2.8%, while the selec- tion error is 6%. This result highlights the presence of a better-hidden ar-chitecture. It presents even lower algorithm errors than our initial architecture. Thus, following the ML process in Fig. 7 , we elaborated theﬁnal architecture of the ANN. Fig. 7 represents the result of our elaboration considering the ﬁnd- ings achieved with the POS test. The number of inputs is 3, and thenumber of outputs is 1. The complexity, represented by the numbers of hidden neurons, is 6:4:2. Therefore, compared to Fig. 4 , this ANNs presents an automatic choice that has reduced the third hidden layer of a neuron. Afterwards, we test the ﬁnal architecture through different operations. A standard method to test the loss of a model is to perform a linear regression analysis between the scaled ANNs outputs and the cor- responding targets for an independent testing subset. As observed in Fig. 8 , the prediction line (with respect to the target, GGWS ) perfectly con ﬁrms the goodness of the elaboration about the al- gorithm on the ﬁnal architecture. As required by theory, the slope of the straight line records a value close to unity ; the correlation value is very high . Finally, we proceed with the ANNs error test  to ascertain the goodness of ﬁt test of this algorithm. It analyzes the result of four dif- ferent errors concerning the three main instances of the NN model. Table 6 analyzes four possible scenarios of prediction errors concerning training, selection, and testing. For ANNs theory, values from training to testing should be gradually lower and lower than unity. The results obtained fully con ﬁrm the theory of this test. All the errors of the three main components of the ANNs are less than one. Be- sides, it is clear how the training errors are lower than the selection er- rors, which are lower than the testing errors. This test con ﬁrms how the latest architecture of the ANNs respects the hypothesis of the slightest prediction error and that our generated target is correctly affected by the in ﬂuence of the numerous combinations between the inputs. We complemented the ANN algorithm using time series-based re- gression in a bivariate framework to examine the in ﬂuence of the Fig. 7. Final architecture of ANNs results. Source: our elaborations in NN Design Software on Oryx. Fig. 6. Incremental order error plot test. Source: our elaborations. Fig. 8. Predictive linear regression test. Source: our elaboration.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 9 predictors on GHG from waste sector. It can be observed in Fig. 9 that total municipal waste generation, income level and urban population have a negative relationship with waste sector attributed GHG, with a predictive power between 65 and 87% and strength of correlation be- tween−0.81 to −0.93. This con ﬁrms the hypothesis that Denmark is on the verge of achieving a circular economy —meaning that, while urban population increases with growth in income and levels of munic- ipal waste generated, waste sector attributed GHG emissions decline periodically. In terms of variable in ﬂuence in reducing GHG emissions, it can be observed from the variable importance of projection plot that while urban population is highly in ﬂuential  municipal waste generation and income level are moderately in ﬂuential , thus, corroborating both estimated Pearson's correla- tion and R-square.Evidence from Breitung-Candelon Spectral Granger-causality test in Fig. 10 reveals that the null hypothesis of no predictability from urban population to GHG from waste sector and municipal waste generation to GHG from waste sector is rejected at 5% signi ﬁcance level. We ob- serve that among all odds, urban population has a strong unidirectional causality along the entire frequency range compared to municipal waste generation that turns insigni ﬁcant between ω∈ frequency range. In contrast, we ﬁnd no causality from urban population to munic- ipal waste generation, income level to municipal waste generation, and income level to GHG from waste sector. From a policy perspective, it ap- pears that urbanization has a mitigation effect on waste sector attrib- uted GHG emissions which might perhaps be due to Denmark's urban waste management options that underscore recycling, reusing and ef ﬁ- cient conversion of waste-to-energy. Previously, waste generation in Denmark had strong positive monotonic associated with economic de- velopment and emissions, which supported the traditional linear econ- omy . However, our empirical estimation con ﬁrms a drift from linear economy to circular economy. This implies that the Danish government is implementing conservation and management policies that favour environmental sustainability. Finally, we report the result of the predictive causality effect from the inputs to the target. This result highlights three possible variations of the target: position, velocity, and acceleration. The three variables presented in Table 7 cause a predictive variation of the target with Fig. 9. Nexus between GHG from waster sector and  municipal waste generation  income level  urban population.  variable importance of projection  for sampled series. Legend: UP: Urban population; TMWG: Total Municipal Waste Management; RPCGDP: per capita GDP.Table 6 ANNs error test.Source: our elaborations. Training Selection Testing Sum squared error 0.000 0.005 0.021 Mean squared error 0.000 0.001 0.004Root mean squared error 0.001 0.033 0.064 Minkowski error 0.000 0.026 0.066C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 10 different speed and acceleration levels. We can note that the emissions from waste are accelerated by the quantity of municipal solid waste products in the country under study. However, we note that this accel- eration would represent a linear transition from urban growth to thechange in per capita GDP towards waste production. We can also inter- pret these results by weighing the role of the change in per capita GDP compared to the urban increase. The variable of which represents eco- nomic growth in a high-income country such as Denmark, generates a more signi ﬁcant effect in the production of waste and emissions, com- pared to a hypothetical growth of the population. If the transition be- tween speed and acceleration towards the target passes from economic growth to waste production, the increase in the demand for goods and services of the population is directly a consequence of the emissions . Besides, the changes in target acceleration is predic- tively caused by the change in speed and acceleration of the Municipal solid waste. Therefore, a separate waste collection policy would gener- ate a change in the decrease in the acceleration of the target and, thus, in emissions. The effects of such an economic waste management policy Fig. 10. Breitung-Candelon Spectral Granger-causality showing  Urban population →GHG from waste sector  municipal waste generation →GHG from waste sector  urban population →Municipal waste generation  GDP per Capita →Municipal waste generation  GDP per Capita →GHG from waste sector. Table 7 Inputs on the target.Source: our elaborations. Position Velocity Acceleration TMWG 0.4 0.8 0.9 GDPp 0.3 0.7 0.8Urban 0.2 0.4 0.7C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 11 would have a recordable economic impact on the acceleration of GDPp . Different waste collection companies, as is happening in Denmark, can adopt policies of opening up to the economic market. By purchasing the raw material produced by users , the materials could be used in a transformation cycle. Therefore, they will create new products in the economic system. In this way, users are not pushed and throw waste onto the street for which they are remunerated. Finally, we tested our NN algorithm in the process that generates dif- ferent alternative models with the Optimization Test in Machine Learn- ing . This experiment created 70 different transformations ofthe dataset and developed 30 different algorithms  ca- pable of predicting a causal link between the variables. The process , which lasted 4 min and 36 s, found 16 candidates for the solu- tion of the experiment. Of these 16 models, only 8 were selected. Of the 8 models selected, the system showed the result of the comparative R- squared. As observed from the results, our algorithm (Back Propagation Neural Networks) has a relatively large R-squared . The optimization test also took into consideration hypothetical econometric and statistical models. However, they turned out to be less suitable than alternative models like ours or the boosted trees. Fig. 11. Optimization test in machine learning results. C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 12 Therefore, we can conclude that there is no algorithm better than the one used in this study. 5. Conclusion and policy implications This paper presented the ﬁrst evidence on the causal relationship be- tween MSW generation per capita, per capita GDP, urbanization, and GHG emissions from the waste sector in Denmark. We exploited the most recent and available data period  and a very current estimate model based on Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks and Breitung- Candelon Spectral Granger-causality. In contrast to traditional statistic or econometric techniques, we employed sophisticated mathematical methods since they better penetrate the laws of the “environment ”.I n fact, after processing the data through numerous combinations in the so-called learning phase, our Neural Network proposed a linearization of the problem, which we solved using a mathematical formula that binds the different ones together variables. Our Neural Network re- quired a double construction to choose autonomously through the In- cremental Order Test, the best “input neurons ”capable of generating theﬁnal signal to the selected target. This procedure, con ﬁrmed by the most sophisticated Machine Learning tests, allowed us to obtain a neu- ral network from which we observed how GHG emissions from the waste sector in Denmark undergo variations based on the economic trend of the Total Municipal Solid Waste Generation, from the proxy for urbanization and GDP per capita. The results showed how the vari- ance of per capita GDP represents the variable that can accelerate emis- sions from waste. Our results obtained from the analysis of neural networks could be interpreted as a coupling-decoupling relationship between economic growth and management of waste that causes harmful emissions. In- deed, a greater wealth that certainly translates into a higher amount of waste generated is associated with a reduction of emissions from the waste sector. Similarly, our time series model corroborated these ﬁndings and found a signi ﬁcant negative monotonic relationship be- tween waste sector GHG emissions, income, urbanization, and munici-pal waste generation. In line with that, the Breitung-Candelon Spectral Granger-causality supports the existence of a unidirectional causal link from urban population and municipal waste to waste emissions. Bring- ing high value information, our time-series ﬁndings con ﬁrmed logically the results of the machine learning approach. Hence, an accurate inter- pretation of them is required to design consistent policy measures. In a given economy, the amount of waste generated is effectively linked to the level of income, and thus wealth. However, it has also been shown that such relation can be non-linear. As income grows over time, recycling, composting, and incinerating processes may re- place standard land ﬁlls. As a matter of fact, a de-linking relationship among wealth and waste may emerge, with major positive effects on the environmental quality. Since Denmark displays one of the world's highest income per capita, this economy may have reached a turning point of economic development after which, wealth enhances waste generation while it reduces emissions from the waste sector. Accord- ingly, it is a relevant perspective for policy making at a national scale —as the nation-speci ﬁc waste situation is a crucial issue in Europe. First, reducing the costs and improving the effectiveness of major waste treatment policies is necessary. This concerns phasing- out from land ﬁll strategies, but also developing high-tech waste inciner- ation and recycling processes across the Danish territory. Because the proportion of urban population is decidedly linked to waste generation and emissions in Denmark, speci ﬁc attention should be drawn to densely populated areas, where waste management is at the heart of environmental concerns but also the core of solutions. Second, lowering the generation of waste at its source should explicitly be pursued, since strengthening the waste management in the post-production phase is not suf ﬁcient. Thus, waste policy efforts should focus on changing agents' behaviour and ﬁrms' decisions at the level of waste production. Otherwise, an increasing gap will emerge between the policy objective and its effective implementation (uncontrolled polluting emissions from the Danish waste sector). Opening to an international prospect, our results would represent policy advice based on a global policy that sees wealth as the solution to waste emissions. Obviously, investments in waste management are functions of the economic and social capacity of the country, but alsoon its willingness to achieve environmental targets. While logical for such an advanced economy like Denmark, other developing countries face chronic dif ﬁculties in managing waste because of a crucial lack of ﬁ- nancial capacity and public infrastructures devoted to this issue. There- fore, future studies should examine the wealth-waste-emissions nexus in developing countries if data availability allows that. Since numerous urban areas display critical levels of untreated and polluting waste, re- searchers should identify the conditions under which a cutting-edge waste chain may be implemented in low- and middle- income coun- tries. But ﬁrst and foremost, promoting adequate waste management practices would substantially help turning these cities towards a sus- tainable path. CRediT authorship contribution statement Cosimo Magazzino: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analy- sis, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - review &editing. Marco Mele: Conceptualization, Writing - original draft. Nicolas Schneider: Conceptualization, Writing - original draft. Samuel Asumadu Sarkodie: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - re- view & editing. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgement Open Access funding provided by Nord University. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142510 . References Acaravci, A., Ozturk, I., 2010. On the relationship between energy consumption, CO 2emis- sions and economic growth in Europe. Energy 35 , 5412 –5420. Ali, S.M., Pervaiz, A., Afzal, B., Hamid, N., Yasmin, A., 2014. Open dumping of municipal solid waste and its hazardous impacts on soil and vegetation diversity at wastedumping sites of Islamabad city. Journal of King Saud University –Science 26, 59 –65. Andersen, F.M., Larsen, H.V., 2012. FRIDA: a model for the generation and handling of solid waste in Denmark. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 65, 47 –56. Arbulú, I., Lozano, J., Rey-Maquieira, J., 2015. Tourism and solid waste generation in Europe: a panel data assessment of the environmental Kuznets curve. WasteManag. 46, 628 –636. Ayalon, O., Avnimelech, Y., Shechter, M., 2001. Solid waste treatment as a high-priority and low-cost alternative for greenhouse gas mitigation. Environ. Manag. 27 , 697–704. Baalbaki, R., Marrouch, W., 2020. Is there a garbage Kuznets curve? Evidence from OECD countries. Econ. Bull. 40 , 1049 –1055. Baek, J., 2015. Environmental Kuznets curve for CO 2emissions: the case of Arctic coun- tries. Energy Econ. 50, 13 –17. Barbier, E., 2011. The policy challenges for green economy and sustainable economic de- velopment. Nat. Res. Forum 233 –245. Ben Jebli, M., Ben Youssef, S., Ozturk, I., 2013. The Environmental Kuznets Curve: The Role of Renewable and Non-renewable Energy Consumption and Trade Openness.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 13 Bernstad, A., Jansen, J., 2012. Review of comparative LCAs of food waste management systems –current status and potential improvements. Waste Manag. 32 , 2439 –2455. Beşe, E., Kalayci, S., 2019. Environmental Kuznets curve : empirical relationship be- tween economic growth, energy consumption, and CO2 emissions: evidence from 3developed countries. Panoeconomicus 1 –26. Bilgili, F., Koçak, E., Bulut, Ü., 2016. The dynamic impact of renewable energy consumption on CO2 emissions: a revisited environmental Kuznets curve approach. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 54, 838 –845. Bogner, J., Pipatti, R., Hashimoto, S., Diaz, C., Mareckova, K., Diaz, L., Kjeldsen, P., Monni, S., Faaij, A., Gao, Qingxian, Zhang, Tianzhu, Ahmed, Mohammed Abdelra ﬁe, Sutamihardja, R.T.M., Gregory, R., 2008. Mitigation of global greenhouse gas emis- sions from waste: conclusions and strategies from the intergovernmental panel on climate change  fourth assessment report. Working group III . Waste Management Resources 26, 11 –32. Bowden, N., Payne, J.E., 2009. The causal relationship between US energy consumption and real output: a disaggregated analysis. J. Policy Model 31 , 180 –188. Breitung, J., Candelon, B., 2006. Testing for short-and long-run causality: a frequency- domain approach. J. Econ. 132 , 363 –378. Chalak, A., Abou-Daher, C., Chaaban, J., Abiad, M.G., 2016. The global economic and regu- latory determinants of household food waste generation: a cross-country analysis. Waste Manag. 48, 418 –422. Clarke, C., Williams, I.D., Turner, D.A., 2019. Evaluating the carbon footprint of WEEE man- agement in the UK. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 141, 465 –473. Cole, M.A., Rayner, A.J., Bates, J.M., 1997. The environmental Kuznets curve: an empirical analysis. Environ. Dev. Econ. 2, 401 –416. D’Adamo, I., Falcone, P.M., Ferella, F., 2019. A socio-economic analysis of biomethane in the transport sector: the case of Italy. Waste Manag. 95, 102 –115. Das, S., Lee, S.H., Kumar, P., Kim, K.H., Lee, S.S., Bhattacharya, S.S., 2019. Solid waste man- agement: scope and the challenge of sustainability. J. Clean. Prod. 228, 658 –678. Dasgupta, S., Laplante, B., Wang, H., Wheeler, D., 2002. Confronting the environmental Kuznets curve. J. Econ. Perspect. 16 , 147 –168. Dinda, S., 2004. Environmental Kuznets curve hypothesis: a survey. Ecol. Econ. 49 , 431–455. Domingos, H.A., Faria, A.M.D.M., Fuinhas, J.A., Marques, A.C., 2017. Renewable energy and greenhouse gas emissions from the waste sectors of European Union member states: a panel data analysis. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24 , 18770 –18781. Dong, Y.H., An, A.K., Yan, Y.S., Yi, S., 2017. Hong Kong ’s greenhouse gas emissions from the waste sector and its projected changes by integrated waste management facilities. J. Clean. Prod. 149, 690 –700. Farhani, S., Ben Rejeb, J., 2012. Energy consumption, economic growth and CO 2emissions: evidence from panel data for MENA region. International Journal of Energy Econom- ics and Policy  2 , 71 –81. Grossman, G.M., Krueger, A.B., 1991. Environmental impacts of a North American free trade agreement. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, p. 3914. Halloran, A., Clement, J., Kornum, N., Bucatariu, C., Magid, J., 2014. Addressing food waste reduction in Denmark. Food Policy 49, 294 –301. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , 2007. In: Metz, O.R.D.B., Bosch, P.R., Cambridge, L.A. Meyer , Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assess- ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge Univer- sity Press, Cambridge. Jaligot, R., Chenal, J., 2018. Decoupling municipal solid waste generation and economic growth in the canton of Vaud, Switzerland. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 130, 260 –266. Johnstone, N., Labonne, J., 2004. Generation of household solid waste in OECD countries: an empirical analysis using macroeconomic data. Land Econ. 80 , 529 –538. Kannangara, M., Dua, R., Ahmadi, L., Bensebaa, F., 2018. Modeling and prediction of re- gional municipal solid waste generation and diversion in Canada using machine learning approaches. Waste Manag. 74, 3 –15. Karousakis, K., 2007. Incentives to reduce GHG emissions from deforestation: lessons learned from Costa Rica and Mexico. OECD Pap. 7 , 1 –50. Kasman, A., Duman, Y.S., 2015. CO2emissions, economic growth, energy consumption, trade and urbanization in new EU member and candidate countries: a panel dataanalysis. Econ. Model. 44, 97 –103. Khan, S.A.R., Qianli, D., SongBo, W., Zaman, K., Zhang, Y., 2017. Environmental logistics performance indicators affecting per capita income and sectoral growth: evidence from a panel of selected global ranked logistics countries. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24 , 1518 –1531. Khan, S.A.R., Zhang, Y., Anees, M., Golpîra, H., Lahmar, A., Qianli, D., 2018. Green supply chain management, economic growth and environment: a GMM based evidence. J. Clean. Prod. 185, 588 –599. Khan, S.A.R., Sharif, A., Golpîra, H., Kumar, A., 2019. A green ideology in Asian emerging economies: from environmental policy and sustainable development. Sustainable Development 27 , 1063 –1075 November/December. Kjær, Birgitte, Werge, Mads, 2010. Forundersøgelse af madspild i Danmark. Miljøstyrelsen. . Kinnaman, T.C., Fullerton, D., 1997. Garbage and recycling in communities with curbside recycling and unit-based pricing. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, p. 6021. Kocaoglu, M., Snyder, C., Dimakis, A.G., Vishwanath, S., 2017. CausalGAN: learning causal implicit generative models with adversarial training. arXiv. Kuznets, S., 1955. Economic growth and income inequality. Am. Econ. Rev. 45 , 1 –28. Lee, S., Kim, J., Chong, W.K., 2016. The causes of the municipal solid waste and the green- house gas emissions from the waste sector in the United States. Waste Manag. 56, 593–599. Liu, C., Wu, X.W., 2011. Factors in ﬂuencing municipal solid waste generation in China: a multiple statistical analysis study. Waste Manag. Res. 29 , 371 –378.Lozano, S., Gutierrez, E., 2008. Non-parametric frontier approach to modelling the rela- tionships among population, GDP, energy consumption and CO 2emissions. Ecol. Econ. 66 , 687 –699. Ludwig, C., Hellweg, S., Stucki, S., 2003. Municipal Solid Waste Management. Springer- Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. Luttenberger, L.R., 2020. Waste management challenges in transition to circular economy –case of Croatia. J. Clean. Prod. 256. Magazzino, C., 2014. A panel VAR approach of the relationship among economic growth, CO2emissions, and energy use in the ASEAN-6 countries. Int. J. Energy Econ. Policy 4 , 546 –553. Magazzino, C., 2016. CO2emissions, economic growth, and energy use in the Middle East countries: a panel VAR approach. Energy Sources, Part B: Economics, Planning, and Policy 11 , 960 –968. Magazzino, C., Cerulli, G., 2019. The determinants of CO 2emissions in MENA countries: a responsiveness scores approach. International Journal of Sustainable Development &World Ecology 26 , 522 –534. Magazzino, M., Mele, M., Schneider, N., 2020a. The relationship between municipal solid waste and greenhouse gas emissions: evidence from Switzerland. Waste Manag. 113, 508–520. Magazzino, C., Mele, M., Schneider, N., 2020b. The relationship between air pollution and COVID-19-related deaths: An application to three French cities. Appl. Energy 279,115835. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115835 . Magazzino, C., Mele, M., Schneider, N., Vallet, G., 2020c. The relationship between nuclear energy consumption and economic growth: evidence from Switzerland. Environ. Res. Lett. 15, 0940a5. Malinauskaite, J., Jouhara, H., Czajczy ńska, D., Stanchev, P., Katsou, E., Rostowksi, P., Thorne, R.J., Colón, J., Ponsá, S., Al-Mansour, F., Anguilano, L., Krzy żyńska, R., López, I.C., Vlasopoulos, A., Spencer, N., 2017. Municipal solid waste management and waste-to-energy in the context of a circular economy and energy recycling in Europe. Energy 141, 2013 –2044. Martel, A., Klibi, W., 2016. Designing Value-creating Supply Chain Networks. Springer, Cham. Mazzanti, M., 2008. Is waste generation de-linking from economic growth? Empirical ev- idence for Europe. Appl. Econ. Lett. 15 , 287 –291. Mazzanti, M., Zoboli, R., 2005. Delinking and environmental Kuznets curves for waste in- dicators in Europe. Environ. Sci. 2 , 409 –425. Mazzanti, M., Zoboli, R., 2008. Waste generation, waste disposal and policy effectiveness: evidence on decoupling from the European Union. Resources . Conservation and Recycling 52 , 1221 –1234. Mazzanti, M., Montini, A., Zoboli, R., 2006. Municipal waste production, economic drivers, and new waste policies: EKC evidence from Italian regional and provincial panel data.Fondazione Enrico Mattei Working Papers, p. 155. McCulloch, W.S., Pitts, W.H., 1943. A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous ac- tivity. Bull. Math. Biophys. 7, 115 –133. Mele, M., Magazzino, C., 2020. A machine learning analysis of the relationship among iron and steel industries, air pollution, and economic growth in China. J. Clean. Prod. 277, 123293. Meza, J.K.S., Yepes, D.O., Rodrigo-Ilarri, J., Cassiraga, E., 2019. Predictive analysis of urban waste generation for the city of Bogotá, Colombia, through the implementation of de- cision tree-based machine learning, support vector machines and arti ﬁcial neural networks. Heliyon 5, 1-11. Mst.dk, 2015. Denmark without Waste II. Retrieved from. https://buff.ly/3iImCT5 . Munir, Q., Lean, H.H., Smyth, R., 2020. CO 2emissions, energy consumption and economic growth in the ASEAN-5 countries: a cross-sectional dependence approach. Energy Econ. 85, 104571. OECD, 2019a. . Available:. https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_resolveuid/JBOQUP7I5R . OECD, 2019b. Global Material Resources Outlook to 2060: Economic Drivers and Environ- mental Consequences. OECD Publishing, Paris https://doi.org/10.1787/ 9789264307452-en . Pan, A., Yu, L., Yang, Q., 2019. Characteristics and forecasting of municipal solid waste gen- eration in China. Sustainability 11 , 1 –11. Pao, H.T., Tsai, C.M., 2011. Multivariate Granger causality between CO 2emissions, energy consumption, FDI  and GDP : ev- idence from a panel of BRIC  countries. Energy 36 , 685 –693. Pearl, J., 2009. Causality. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pesaran, H. Hashem, Shin, Y., 1998. Generalized impulse response analysis in linear mul- tivariate models. Econ. Lett. 58 , 17 –29. Pesaran, M. Hashem, Shin, Y., Smith, Richard J., 2001. Bounds testing approaches to the analysis of level relationships. J. Appl. Econ. 16 , 289 –326. Rothman, D.S., De Bruyn, S.M., 1998. Probing into the environmental Kuznets curve hy- pothesis. Ecol. Econ. 25, 143 –145. Saidi, K., Hammami, S., 2015. The impact of energy consumption and CO 2emissions on economic growth: fresh evidence from dynamic simultaneous-equations models. Sustain. Cities Soc. 14, 178 –186. Sarkodie, S.A., 2020. Causal effect of environmental factors, economic indicators and do- mestic material consumption using frequency domain causality test. Sci. Total Envi- ron. 736, 139602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139602 . Sarkodie, S.A., 2021. Environmental performance, biocapacity, carbon & ecological foot- print of nations: drivers, trends and mitigation options. Sci. Total Environ. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141912 . Sarkodie, S.A., Adom, P.K., 2018. Determinants of energy consumption in Kenya: a NIPALS approach. Energy 159, 696 –705. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.06.195 . Sarkodie, S.A., Owusu, P.A., 2020. Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on waste management. Environment, Development and Sustainability https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-020- 00956-y .C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 14 Sarkodie, S.A., Strezov, V., 2019. A review on environmental Kuznets curve hypothesis using bibliometric and meta-analysis. Sci. Total Environ. 649, 128 –145. Shaﬁei, S., Salim, R.A., 2014. Non-renewable and renewable energy consumption and CO 2 emissions in OECD countries: a comparative analysis. Energy Policy 66, 547 –556. Silva, S., Soares, I., Pinho, C., 2012. The impact of renewable energy sources on economic growth and CO2 emissions-a SVAR approach. European Research Studies 15, 133. Sjöström, M., Östblom, G., 2010. Decoupling waste generation from economic growth –a CGE analysis of the Swedish case. Ecol. Econ. 69 , 1545 –1552. Sokka, L., Antikainen, R., Kauppi, P.E., 2007. Municipal solid waste production and compo- sition in Finland –changes in the period 1960 –2002 and prospects until 2020. Re- sources. Conservation and Recycling 50 , 475 –488. Stern, D.I., 2004. The rise and fall of the environmental Kuznets curve. World Dev. 32 , 1419 –1438. Stern, D.I., Common, M.S., 2001. Is there an environmental Kuznets curve for sulfur? J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 41 , 162 –178. Tiwari, A.K., 2011. A structural VAR analysis of renewable energy consumption, real GDP and CO 2emissions: evidence from India. Econ. Bull. 31 , 1793 –1806. Toda, H.Y., Yamamoto, T., 1995. Statistical inference in vector autoregressions with possi- bly integrated processes. J. Econ. 66 , 225 –250. Tomi ć,T . ,D o m i n k o v i ć, D.F., Pfeifer, A., Schneider, D.R., Pedersen, A.S., Dui ć, N., 2017. Waste to energy plant operation under the in ﬂuence of market and legislation condi- tioned changes. Energy 137, 1119 –1129.United Nations, 2015. Sustainable Development Goals. Retrieved from. https:// sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300 . Van Fan, Y., et al., 2020. Implementing Circular Economy in municipal solid waste treat- ment system using P-graph. Sci. Total Environ. 701, 134652. Wang, Y.C., 2013. Functional sensitivity of testing the environmental Kuznets curve hy- pothesis. Resour. Energy Econ. 35 , 451 –466. Wanner, T., 2015. The new ‘passive revolution ’of the green economy and growth dis- course: maintaining the ‘sustainable development ’of neoliberal capitalism. New Po- litical Economy 20 , 21 –41. WDI, 2019. . Available at: t. https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development- indicators . Woon, K.S., Lo, I.M., 2013. Greenhouse gas accounting of the proposed land ﬁll extension and advanced incineration facility for municipal solid waste management in HongKong. Sci. Total Environ. 458, 499 –507. Yang, N., Zhang, H., Chen, M., Shao, L.M., He, P.J., 2012. Greenhouse gas emissions from MSW incineration in China: impacts of waste characteristics and energy recovery. Waste Manag. 32 , 2552 –2560. Yi, S., Yang, H., Lee, S.H., An, K.J., 2014. Quantifying and managing regional greenhouse gas emissions: waste sector of Daejeon. Korea. Journal of Environmental Sciences 26 , 1249 –1259.C. Magazzino, M. Mele, N. Schneider et al. Science of the Total Environment 755  142510 15 

