Phosphorus circular economy of disposable baby nappy waste: Quanti ﬁcation, assessment of recycling technologies and plan for sustainability Rubel Biswas Chowdhury ⁎,Mayuri Wijayasundara School of Engineering, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria 3216, Australia HIGHLIGHTS •Australia lost 5452 tonne phosphorus  in baby nappy waste in 2001 –2019. •P recovery is overlooked in most of the recycling technologies for nappy waste. •Composting, pyrolysis, and polymer separation are common nappy recycling methods. •Use of nappy waste compost for bam- boo and cotton production can close the loop. •New product and system design can help achieve P circular economy of nappy waste.GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT abstract article info Article history: Received 1 June 2021 Received in revised form 25 July 2021 Accepted 25 July 2021 Available online 30 July 2021 Editor: Frederic CoulonThis study assessed the potential for minimizing human excreta bound phosphorus  loss through used dispos- able baby nappies, an area that remained unexplored for nations. Accordingly, it performed a substance ﬂow analysis to assess the national P loss through used disposable baby nappies in the case of Australia. The analysis revealed that approximately 308 tonne P is lost through used baby nappies to land ﬁlls in Australia in 2019, which is nearly 2.5% of the overall P excreta as human waste. Although the quantity seems small in percentage term, it could result in the loss of a signi ﬁcant amount of P over several years, as assessed 5452 tonne P over the 2001 –2019 period, which is concerning in the context of anticipated future global P scarcity. The review of peer-reviewed literature on available technologies/methods for recycling disposable baby nappy waste indicates that there are some technologies for recycling P particularly through co-composting with food and other organic wastes, while the majority of these are still at the lab/pilot scale. There are also various recycling techniques with purpose ranging from energy recovery to volume reduction, generation of pulp, hydrogel, cellulose, and polymer as well as to increase yield stress and viscosity of concrete, however, these are not effective in P recovery. The study implies that compost made of nappy waste can be used as fertilizer to produce bamboo, cotton, and maize plants to supply raw materials for producing biodegradable nappies, hence, to close the loop. The various product and system design options e.g., designing for ﬂushing, designing for disassembling the excreta containing part, and designing for community composting suggested in this study could be further researched for identifying best suitable option to achieve P circular economy of disposable baby nappies. This study also recommends nec- essary interventions at various stages of the nappy life cycle to ensure sustainable management of phosphorus. ©2 0 2 1E l s e v i e rB . V .A l lr i g h t sr e s e r v e d .Keywords: Circular economy Phosphorus recycling Baby diapers Substance ﬂow analysis Human waste management Sustainable design Environmental managementScience of the Total Environment 799  149339 ⁎Corresponding author. E-mail address: rubel.c@deakin.edu.au . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.149339 0048-9697/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Science of the Total Environment journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv 1. Introduction Phosphorus  is a non-substitutable essential element for the growth and survival of all living organisms including plant, animal and microorganisms. The modern global food production system is heavily reliant on the application of commercial P fertilizers, which mainly sourced through the mining of phosphate rock, a non-renewable and geographically restricted resource. The dwindling global reserves of phosphate rock with a lifetime of few hundred years is restricted to only a few countries (mainly Morocco with ap- proximately 75% of the global reserves) and the majority of the countries rely on P import for food production. The increasing de- mand of P for producing food for growing global population, the dwindling reserves, and geopolitical constraints likely to create P scarcity in future and farmers of many countries (mainly economi- cally poor and developing countries) may lose their access to com- mercial P fertilizers, which may ultimately result in food insecurity . The excessive loss of P from the agricultural and waste management systems to water bodies around the world not only resulting in the depletion of the limited global P resource but also destroying valuable aquatic ecosystems and water resources by causing algal bloom and eutrophication, which is clearly evident from many re- cent studies . The importance of minimizing P loss from various systems particularly the waste management system for the sustainable management of this limited global resource is well- known . The available substance ﬂow analyses of P indicates that worldwide, nearly 17% of the mined P is consumed in human food, which ultimately ends up in human excreta . Al- though the importance of P recovery from human excreta that is col- lected and managed through the wastewater collection and treatment systems in many countries was addressed in numerous literature , the fraction of P in human ex- creta that is lost through disposable baby nappies in a country was not assessed in any of the available substance ﬂow analyses of P that pub- lished in peer reviewed journals ( Chowdhury et al., 2014 ;Rahman et al., 2019 ). Hence, there is a clear knowledge gap of understanding the magnitude of P loss through used disposable baby nappies to land ﬁll for nations. Disposable baby nappies (shortened term for baby napkins, and referred to as diapers in some countries) are the absorbent hygieneproduct that is mainly used by infant and toddlers to retain urine and feces until they are prepared to use a sanitary facility to dispose of human excreta . A snapshot of the compo- nents/structure of commonly used baby nappies as presented by Khoo et al.  is provided in the Supplementary Fig. S1 (see Appendix A. Supplementary material 1). The tendency to use disposable baby nappies has increased over time. The global production of disposable nappies is expected to increase to US$ 71 billion per annum by 2022 from US$ 54 billion in 2016 . Disposable baby nappy waste that mostly ends up in land ﬁll is currently a big burden for municipal solid waste management in many countries. Our prelimi- nary literature search con ﬁrmed that there is a lacking of literature to provide a clear understanding of the potential for P recovery from baby nappies. We are also unaware of a thorough review of available recycling technologies/methods for disposable baby nappy waste to un- derstand the bene ﬁcial aspects and limitations, and to assess the methods that are effective in recovery and recycling of P and other nutrients. Therefore, the objectives of this study are to i) Quantity of P that is lost through used disposable baby nappies in the case of Australia using basic substance ﬂow analysis ap- proach. ii) Conduct a systematic review of available recycling methods/ technologies of disposable baby nappies worldwide to identify the suitable techniques for P recovery, the limitations/challengesof existing methods in terms of nutrient recovery, and potential areas for improvement. and iii) Based on that review, present necessary interventions at the var- ious stages of the nappy life cycle to ensure P circular economy. 2. Methods of analysis 2.1. Quanti ﬁcation of P ﬂow through disposable baby nappies in Australia 2.1.1. Method considered for the quanti ﬁcation of P ﬂow For the quantitative analysis of P ﬂow through disposable baby nappies at the national scale for Australia, this study utilized the methods of substance ﬂow analysis  that applies the principle of mass balance to assess the ﬂows and stocks of substance in a system de- ﬁned in space and time ( Van der Voet, 2002 ;Brunner and Rechberger, 2016 ). The basic steps of this method are: i) De ﬁne systems and subsys- tems, and a selection of system boundaries, ii) de ﬁne material and pro- cessﬂows associated with each system and subsystem, iii) collect quantitative data on material/process ﬂow and concentration of sub- stance in each materials/process, iv) analyse the data for calculating substance ﬂow and storage using appropriate software modelling, v) assess the reliability and uncertainty of the results, and vi) interpret the results and provide decisions. 2.1.2. De ﬁning system and system boundaries and pathways of ﬂows The system considered for the current analysis of P loss through used disposable baby nappies in Australia is the food consumption and waste management system. The pathways of P ﬂow across the system and subsystems considered and associated system and subsystem bound- aries are presented in Fig. 1 . A multi-year  time scale is con- sidered as the temporal scale for analysis. 2.1.3. Data utilized and assumptions considered for the quanti ﬁcation of P ﬂow Data utilized for the quanti ﬁcation of P ﬂow is baby population data according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics data on estimated resi- dent population by single year of age  and the rate of daily P intake data according to 2011 –12 Australian Health Survey: Nutrition First Results –Foods and Nutrients . This is to clarify that for baby population data, three age ranges are considered i.e., 0 (0 to <1 year), 1 , and 2 . The reason for considering that age group is, in Australia, potty trainings to babies are given ap- proximately at the age between 2 and 3 years as con ﬁrmed based on the review of available reports published online; therefore, nappies are usually used for babies until they turn 3 years. However, in Australia, approximately 95% of the parents use disposable nappies , while the rest use cloth nappies or reusable nappies. Therefore, for this calculation, this study considers 95% population of the  age group. Most of the P intake as food in human bodies eventually ends up in human excreta ( Cordell et al., 2009 ;Cordell et al., 2013 ), therefore, this study consider 95% of the P intake ended up in human excreta. The rate of daily P intake for each age range is de- termined based on the calculated ‘average rate of increment in P intake with age ’according to 2011 –12 Australian Health Survey data as men- tioned above (see Appendix A. Supplementary material 2 for data and calculations). The majority of the human excreta mainly for population of age 3 year or above ends up in wastewater treatment plants, while the baby nappy bound human excreta mostly collected through solid waste stream and eventually ends up in land ﬁll if not systematically recycled. The assumptions considered in this study may vary from na- tion to nation depending upon the situation of baby nappy use. 2.1.4. Calculation of P ﬂows The calculation was done by multiplying the total number of baby population of each age range in Australia with the rate of daily P excreta by each baby of that age range and then multiplying the product by 365R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 2 days to obtain the total annual P loss for a particular year for the babies of that age range. Similarly, we calculated total P loss for babies of other age ranges for that particular year and ﬁnally summed up the P loss for all age ranges to obtain the total loss for Australia. The methods of calcu- lation for P ﬂow through disposable baby nappy waste for Australia is brieﬂy presented below: i) Calculation of baby population that use disposable baby nappies Total baby population of age 0 to <1 year = A 1 Total baby population of age 1 to <2 year = A 2 Total baby population of age 2 to <3 year = A 3 Considering disposable baby nappies are used for 95% of the totalbaby population; Total baby population of age 0 to <1 year that uses disposable baby nappy = B 1= 0.95 × A 1=0 . 9 5 A 1 Total baby population of age 1 to <2 year that uses disposablebaby nappy = B 2= 0.95 × A 2=0 . 9 5 A 2 Total baby population of age 2 to <3 year that uses disposablebaby nappy = B 3= 0.95 × A 3=0 . 9 5 A 3 ii) Calculation of P excretion rate Daily rate of P intake in food by a baby of age 0 to <1 year = C 1 Daily rate of P intake in food by a baby of age 1 to <2 year = C 2 Daily rate of P intake in food by a baby of age 2 to <3 year = C 3 Considering nearly the entire P intake  as food by human ends up in excreta; Daily rate of P excretion  by a baby of age 0 to <1 year = D 1= 0.95 × C 1=0 . 9 5 C 1 Daily rate of P excretion  by a baby of age 1 to<2 year = D 2= 0.95 × C 2=0 . 9 5 C 2Daily rate of P excretion  by a baby of age 2 to <3 year = D 3= 0.95 × C 3= 0.95C 3 iii) Calculation of annual P ﬂow in used disposable baby nappies The total annual P ﬂow through baby nappy waste for Australia = +  +  = ++ . Depending upon the complexity of the analysis, speci ﬁc software for modelling or quanti ﬁcation of P ﬂow could be used. In some of the pre- vious analyses, for performing SFA of P, various types of software e.g., STAN , MATLAB/Simulink ( Chowdhury et al., 2016 ), and MS Excel and STAN  were utilized. Consid- ering that the current analysis is comparatively less complex, MS Excel software was utilized for the calculation of P loss (for all of the years considered) following the methods explained above (see Appendix A. Supplementary material 2 for data and calculations). 2.1.5. Approach for reliability assessment To check the consistency of the results, we utilized an alternative data on the rate of P excreta that is the rate of P production per capita per year according to Mihelcic et al.  who estimated the global potential for P recovery from human urine and feces. The results of both calculations were then systematically compared to check the con- sistency (see Appendix A. Supplementary material 2 for calculations details). 2.2. Review of different technologies for recycling baby nappies2.2.1. Approach for search and selection of literature for review For the current review, in order to identify peer-reviewed journal ar- ticles that assessed different technologies/methods for recycling dispos- able baby nappies, we performed a thorough search using Google Scholar and Scopus database. The key words used for search areP intake/  consumption  in food by  humanP excretion by humanin urine and feces Wastewater collection/  treatmentP flow in  disposable  baby nappiesSolid waste collection/  storage Food  consumption  system P flow  through  latrines/  toilets13165 12507 12199308Pathways of P loss through  disposable baby nappies Landﬁll308 308 12199Waste  management  systemSystem boundary Unit: tonne P/ year Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the pathways and magnitudes annual national P loss  through used disposable baby nappies in 2019 in Australia .R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 3 ‘recycling of baby nappies or diapers ’,‘recovery of nutrients from baby nappies ’,‘phosphorus recovery from baby nappies ’,‘composting of baby nappies ’,‘sustainable management baby nappies ’and ‘circular economy of baby nappies ’. Through a quick reading of the title and ab- stract  for each article, we have initially screened 45 journal articles from around the world that somewhat addressed the recycling of baby nappies, and ﬁnally, we have selected 22 studies following the below criteria to perform a thorough review: i) The article adequately assessed/explained a particular technol- ogy or method for recycling baby nappies or resource recovery from baby nappies. ii) The article published in peer-reviewed journals in English be- tween 2010 and 2020 that captured the recent advancement in recycling of baby nappies. iii) Information necessary to perform the current review is possible to extract and organize in a systematic order. 2.2.2. Approach for extraction of key information from selected literature To perform an in-depth and systematic review, we have developed a methodical approach that allows extracting all key information from the selected articles for this review. In this approach, we have initially dis- sected each journal articles into three major parts i. Purpose and meth- odology, ii. ﬁndings/results and discussion, and iii. recommendations and future research needs, and did careful reading of each part to extract the key information. We eventually came up with a tabular structure with a number of columns with headings i.e., ‘recovery/recycling tech- nology or method used ’,‘location of the study ’,‘considerations for recycling  ’,‘extent of ap- plication  ’,‘positive/bene ﬁcial aspect ’ and ‘limitations ’that allowed to systematically capture the key informa- tion from each of the selected article. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Quantitative picture of national P loss through baby nappies in Australia Each year, around 2 billion disposable baby nappies are used in Australia that eventually ends up in land ﬁlls , with traditional disposable baby nappies estimated to take up to 150 years to break down . The human excreta  that ends up through baby nappies in Australian land- ﬁll also cause the emission of methane, a greenhouse gas that is 21 times more potent than Carbon dioxide. By weight, nearly 75% of the used baby nappies is urine , containing a considerable amount of P . Thus, a substantial amount of human excreta bound P and other nutrients  also ends up in land ﬁlls through disposal of used baby nappies. Although a num- ber of city councils  in Australia currently offer rebates to households that switch to cloth nappies from disposable baby nappies mainly with the aim to reduce the amount of wastes reaching to land ﬁlls , initiatives for the recovery and recycling of P and other nutrients from disposable baby nappies are still lacking. Theﬁrst substance ﬂow analysis of P relating to disposable baby nappies in Australia as performed in this study indicates that nearly 308 t of P ended up in land ﬁll areas in 2019, which accounts for approx- imately 2.5% of the overall P  excreted as human waste in that year . Although the amount looks small in percentage term for a single year, if not recovered and recycled through a circular economy approach, this could result in the loss of a signi ﬁcant amount of P over a longer term. The multi-year analysis of P loss through baby nappies as presented in Fig. 2 indicates that over the period of 2001 –2019, nearly 5452 t of P was lost in land ﬁll areas of Australia. Considering P is a non-substitutable, non-renewable/ ﬁnite, and geographicallyrestricted resources and the urgency of closing the loops in the global P cycle , recovering and recycling that amount of P is essential. Moreover, considering the asso- ciated life cycle environmental impacts ( Ng et al., 2013 ;Cordella et al., 2015 ), systematic recycling of disposable baby nappies is much re- quired. Although the application of circular economy approaches for recycling baby nappies is underway ( Khoo et al., 2019 ;Mendoza et al., 2019 ), it is essential to consider the perspective of P loss associated with baby nappies and ﬁnding recycling techniques or methods effec- tive in recovery of nutrients along with other elements. Compared to other pathways of P ﬂoss mainly from the agricultural system such as soil erosion and runoff loss, it is comparatively easier to track down and manage P ﬂow associated with baby nappies as systematic collec- tion of household wastes and recovery of P through formal municipal waste management system is possible . This study only presents the quantitative picture of P loss through baby nappies in the case of Australia. However, other developed nations with similar socio-economic conditions likely to have more or less sim- ilar types and magnitudes of P loss through baby nappies. Utilizing the conceptual model that present systems and system boundaries and pathways of P ﬂow through baby nappies  as well as the methods for calculation of P ﬂow as presented in this study, similar quantitative assessments should be performed for other economically developed countries where disposable baby nappies are commonly used. Accord- ingly, it is required to perform a SFA for quantifying the total global P loss through baby nappies, which could be done in our future study. Currently, there is a clear knowledge gap in this regard. 3.2. Review of available technologies/methods for recycling disposable baby nappies The review of available published peer-reviewed journal articles on various baby nappy recycling technologies/methods as presented in Table 1 helped to understand the potential and limitations in terms of P and other nutrient recovery. 3.2.1. Technologies/methods suitable for nutrient recycling A number of studies attempted to understand the potential for recycling baby nappies through composting with food and other organic wastes. For instance, Tsigkou et al.  examined the potential for composting of anaerobic sludge from the co-digestion of used dispos- able nappies and expired food products, while Colón et al.  assessed the potential for composting of nappies with source- separated organic fraction of municipal solid waste . Although both composting methods were found quite suitable for nutrient recov- ery, they have some bene ﬁcial aspects and limitations as presented in Table 1 . For instance, the composting method of Tsigkou et al.  identi ﬁed inability to eliminate harmful bacteria like Salmonella and En- terococcus spp. due to low composting temperature as one of the limi- tations, while the study of Colón et al.  found slightly higher concentration of zinc as the shortcoming. In an experiment of composting of door-to-door collected organic fraction of municipal solid waste with a 3% w/w  of compostable nappies in Barcelona, Spain, Colón et al.  identi- ﬁed that both the composting process and the ﬁnal compost product are not altered by the use of compostable nappies in some important as- pects like the content of pathogen, stability and elemental (e.g., nutrient and heavy metal) composition. Although they suggested the use of compostable nappies as a real alternative to disposable nappies with no technical issues, they emphasized on the need for a complete life cycle assessment  of all the processes to assess the sustainability and environmental impact. Another study of the Municipality of Coroico in Bolivia, where the organic fraction (fecal residues and cellulosic poly- mers) is separated from the plastic part and composted that with locally available components like cow dung, activated bacteria, and Californian red earthworms. Although this was the ﬁrst approach for utilizingR.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 4 vermicomposting for treating disposable nappies, they found it a suit- able approach for circular economy. Another interesting approach which is also suitable for nutrient recovery from used disposable nappies was examined by Nobel and Han  where cellulose and superabsorbent polymers in baby nappies are broken down through soaking shredded nappies in various concentration of sodium hydrox- ide solutions to release nutrients from urine and feces to the solution. The risk of pathogen borne disease from vegetables produced using fecal sludge is often a key concern .Espinosa- Valdemar et al.  experimented the biodegradation of used baby nappies by the fungus Pleurotus ostreatus  in Mexico and found that harvested mushrooms had good appearance and protein content, and were free of human disease pathogens. Similar outcome was observed by another study by Ma et al.  in Tereng- ganu, Malaysia that used nappy and food waste as growth substitute forOyster mushroom. Both studies also indicated signi ﬁcant reduction of weight of biodegradable materials. 3.2.2. Technologies/methods suitable for recycling of other resources Apart from the technologies and methods suitable for recycling of P and other nutrients, a number of other recycling technologies/methods for baby nappies also reported as presented in Table 1 . For instance, Ichiura et al.  examined the possibility of recycling disposable nappy waste pulp after dehydrating the superabsorbent polymer through oxidation using ozone. They observed that the water- absorptivity of the recovered pulp was almost the same as virgin pulp and was higher than the standard value of 10 g/g . Almeida et al.  attempted to identify the composition of each layer of disposable baby nappies and employed thermal analytical tech- niques TG /DTG /Fig. 2. Magnitudes of annual  actual P loss and  cumulative P loss through used disposable baby nappies in Australia.R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 5 Table 1 Types of used disposable baby nappy recycling technologies/methods reported worldwide, their potential for nutrient  recovery, bene ﬁcial aspects, and limitations. Recovery/recycling technology or methodCountry/city/region Consideration for phosphorus and othernutrient recovery andrecyclingBeneﬁcial aspect Limitation Reference Composting of anaerobic sludge from the co-digestion of useddisposable nappies andexpired food productsGreece Phosphorus and nitrogen recovery addressedStable compost products Heavy metals within acceptable limitUnable to eliminate harmful microorganisms like Salmonella and Enterococcusspp.Signiﬁcant losses of nitrogen from digestrateTsigkou et al., 2020a Composting of nappies with source-separated organicfraction of municipal solid waste Barcelona, Spain Phosphorus recovery not addressed but nitrogenrecovery addressedCompost without and with nappies were identical in terms of stability,maturity and phytotoxicity Showed no presence of pathogenic microorganismsSlightly higher concentration of zinc in compostUncertainty derives from the unknown behavior of superabsorbent polymers insoilColón et al., 2011 Composting of door-to-door collected OFMSW with a 3% biodegradablenappiesBarcelona, Spain Phosphorus recovery not addressed but nitrogenrecovery addressedThe composting process and the ﬁnal products were not altered in mainaspects such as stability, pathogeniccontent, and elemental compositionOnly applicable to compostable nappiesColón et al., 2013 Composting of the organic nappy hydrogel through vermicomposting processCity of Coroico, BoliviaPhosphorus, nitrogen and other nutrient recovery addressedShorter treatment time Increase the number of earthworms. Compatible with poor technical andﬁnancial resourcesDid not address heavy metal contentsFerronato et al., 2020 Takakura composting method Indonesia Phosphorus, nitrogen and potassium recoveryaddressedRequire small space, less odor, and easy to conduct because waste produced canbe directly processed at any timewithout special treatment The quality of the compost produced met the composting standardQuality of compost did not indicate a directproportionality with thenumber of disposable nappies addedZulﬁkar, 2019 Biodegradation by the fungus Oyster mushroomMexico Phosphorus and nitrogen recovery not clearlyaddressed, however it islikely to be possible asmushroom grew wellWeight and volume of degradable materials were reduced up to 90%Harvested mushrooms had goodappearance and protein content, andwere free of pathogensNot addressed Espinosa-Valdemar et al., 2011 Used nappy and food waste as growth substitute for Oyster mushroomTerengganu, MalaysiaPhosphorus, nitrogen and potassium recovery addressedReduced the weight of growth substrate up to 40% Mushroom had similar metaboliteproﬁle to that cultured by commercial media No accumulation of toxic and biologicalsubstratesNot addressed Ma et al., 2020 Valorization of biomass and nappy waste into high nutrient growth substrate for medicinal mushroomLingzhi Terengganu, MalaysiaPhosphorus, nitrogen and other nutrient recovery addressedNappy core acted as good moisture control agent and nutrient booster for the Lingzhi mushroom Higher mycelium spreading rate andhigh quality Lingzhi mushroomproducedSigniﬁcant reduction of waste going to landﬁllVariable elements e.g., pH, temperature need to be optimizedKhoo et al., 2021 Small-scale biological composting with yard wasteMexico Phosphorus recovery not addressed but nitrogen recovery addressedUp to 87% mass reduction for nappies was possible, and only the plastic ﬁlms were recoveredThe compost had good quality and metthe limits set in the local regulation andcould be effectively used as a soilamendment as examined by thephyto-toxicity tests using tomatoSlightly higher pH level Espinosa-Valdemar et al., 2014 Nutrient solution extraction from used disposable nappiesNot clear Phosphorus, nitrogen and potassium recovery addressedEffective in nitrogen and phosphorus recovery, removal of pathogen, and making plant available nitrogenNot addressed Nobel and Han, 2020 Dark fermentation of used disposable nappies andexpired food productsunder different pH valuesSpain Phosphorus and nitrogen recovery addressedCan produce hydrogen and volatile fatty acidsOptimum hydrogen productionoccurred at pH 6 and maximum volatilefatty acid production occurred at pH 7Allows valorization of volatile fatty acidsCost of Sodium hydroxide  addition hadsigniﬁcant impact on the net economic potentialZagklis et al., 2021 Pyrolysis South Africa Nutrient recovery not addressedHelp to recover pyro-oil, pyro-gas and pyro-charNot addressed Khanyile et al., 2020 Microwave pyrolysis Malaysia Phosphorus recovery not addressed but nitrogenrecovery addressedGenerate pyrolysis products e.g., liquid oil , gases  and charproduct Liquid oil can be used as chemicaladditives, cosmetic products and fuel The solid char has potential for use asLow nitrogen recovery Lam et al., 2019R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 6 DTA  to estimate potential energy through combustion. The technique has potential for energy generation and re- ducing space occupied by such waste in land ﬁll. Another recent study identi ﬁed that shredded baby nappies as suitable for manufacturing highly-effective viscosity-modifying admixtures for concrete ( Karimi et al., 2020 ). In their experiment, they observed that shredded waste nappies modify the rheological behavior of cement grouts and concrete by enhancing the yield stress and viscosity. Pyrolysis of baby nappies that uses thermal processes of decomposition could help to recover oil, gas and char products . In another study, Lam et al.  found that microwa ve pyrolysis of used baby nappies that utilize thermochemical process could produce liquid oil that can be used as chemical additives, cosmetic products and fuel, and solid char that has potential for use as adsorbents and soil additives. A number of studies  suggested that separating superabsorbent polymer from used bab y nappies and utilizing that as soil additives could substantially increas e the moisture retention capacity of soil. Some other recycling technologies/methods of used baby nappies are also presented along with their advantages and limitations in Table 1 . This is apparent that all of the various types of recycling approaches explained above have some positive aspects in terms of resource recov- ery and recycling as well as minimizing life cycle environmental impact.However, most of these methods are either at lab experiment or pilotstage, and without the practical and large-scale implementation, it would not be possible to understand how appropriate or effective these techniques are. Considering the ﬁndings of the current review, we suggest that focus should be given on reducing the life cycle environ- mental impact, diverting these wastes going to land ﬁll through recycling, and a balanced and cost-effective recovery of key resources e.g., P and other nutrients and energy. No single technology alone can meet all these requirement and there is need for further research for in- novating technologies that are capable to ensure optimal resource re- covery with minimal cost and environmental footprint. Considering P as a critical resource due to anticipated future scarcity, focus should be given on technologies that are capable of recovering and recycling P and other nutrients. Although some nutrient recovery and recycling techniques are already available, further research should be done to as- sess their environmental and economic feasibilities before large scale implementation. Research should also aim at overcoming the limita- tions of existing technologies as presented in Table 1 . 3.3. Policy/management interventions for disposable baby nappies to achieve phosphorus circular economy In many nations like Australia, the current management and dis- posal systems for used baby nappies are not sustainable and P andTable 1  Recovery/recycling technology or methodCountry/city/region Consideration for phosphorus and othernutrient recovery andrecyclingBeneﬁcial aspect Limitation Reference adsorbents and soil additives Hydrogel recovery for soil irrigation managementPalestine Nutrient recovery not addressedSuperabsorbent polymer recovery for increasing water retention in soil and improving irrigation management andplant growthThe quantity of total water required forthe irrigation can be reduced by 15 –50% with soil modi ﬁed by SAP hydrogelDid not consider separating various components of the waste nappies, including theplastic parts, the SAPs, andthe cellulosic ﬁbersAl-Jabari et al., 2019 Screening and enzymatic treatment, cleaning, and thickeningKorea Nutrient recovery not addressedEffectively separate plastic and ﬁber fraction for reuseNot addressed Kim and Cho, 2017 Combustion, employing the TG/DTG/DTA techniquesHungary Nutrient recovery not addressedEnergy recovery and volume reduction Not addressed Almeida et al., 2019 Using shredded waste nappies as viscositymodifying admixture for cement groutsand concreteEU Nutrient recovery not addressedModify the rheological behavior of cement grouts and concrete byenhancing the yield stress and viscosityCan be a sustainable source forproducing highly effective VMAs in the concrete industryNot addressed Karimi et al., 2020 Hydrothermal carbonization Spain Nutrient recovery not addressedProduction of hydrochar with better combustion characteristics, and a highcarbon content, suitable for energypurposesVolume reduction possibleProduce wastewater with increased chemical oxygendemand and conductivity,requiring further treatmentLow nitrogen content inhydrocharBudyk and Fullana, 2019 Separation of superabsorbent polymer Egypt Nutrient recovery not addressedPotential to conserve soil moisture in light soils using water of good qualitySodium  based, may have impact on soil chemicalpropertiesZekry et al., 2020 Pre-treatment of nappies Greece Nutrient recovery not addressedHelp to separate the biodegradable components from SAP and plasticsAllow SAP volume reduction of 92.7%with low residual cation concentrationsand minimum costRequire further anaerobic treatment for thevalorization of thebiodegradable materialsTsigkou et al., 2020b Recycling disposable nappy waste pulp afterdehydrating the SAPthrough oxidation usingozoneOsaka, Japan Nutrient recovery not addressedThe water-absorptivity of the recovered pulp was almost the same as virgin pulpNot addressed Ichiura et al., 2020 Recovery of cellulose and nanocellulose fromurinated waste nappy using green methodTamil Nadu, India Nutrient recovery not addressedUses less harmful acids like acetic and nitric acidsUp to 25% of cellulose extraction was possible High purity of extracted cellulose wasobservedDespite using 60% sulfuric acid, a minor fraction of unhydrolysed cellulose was present in the spherical cellulose nanocrystalsTrilokesh et al., 2020R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 7 other nutrient recovery are mostly absent. Therefore, based on the cur- rent review, this study recommends necessary interventions to ensure sustainable management of baby nappies to achieve P circular economy. Although the primary focus of this study is to assess the potential for P recovery and recycling from used baby nappies, the recommendations given focus on overall management of baby nappies to ensure recovery of other nutrients and to minimize its life cycle environmental foot-prints. Such a holistic approach considering its sustainable management is missing from the available literature, and this study likely to make a signiﬁcant contribution in this regard. A brief description of the policy/ management strategies to ensure P circular economy of disposable baby nappies is provided as follows. 3.3.1. Solutions from the product and system re-design perspective to enable regeneration Most traditional design solutions have identi ﬁed human excreta as a perishable waste stream, where handling needs to be minimized due to odor rather than a nutrient stream that carries a non-renewable nutri- ent . Hence, the solutions currently used consider the fastest and the most convenient removal of both the excreta and used by nappies from the human interface. If the nutrient recovery is given precedence over stigma created around getting human excreta away at the earliest possible time, there are different solutions that can be explored. Our re- view indicates that given the already available various types of biode- gradable nappies in the market  and the availability of published literature on technologies for composting used biodegradable nappies for nutrient recovery, there is a great po- tential for such nappies in the future. However, necessary researchshould be conducted for assessing the life cycle environmental impact of biodegradable nappies before large scale production and implemen- tation. Product and system designs around biodegradable nappies could pave the way for achieving P circular economy of disposable baby nappies. In this regard, based on the current review and our under- standing of the available information online, a number of possible new design concepts are discussed along with their pros and cons as follows: 3.3.1.1. Designing for disposal through traditional human excreta collection and treatment in wastewater management system. Considering the avail- ability of other ﬂushable hygiene products like ﬂushable sanitary pads  and ﬂushable wipes ( Atasa ğun and Bhat, 2020 ), designing biodegradable ﬂushable baby nappy products could be a reality in the near future. Such used ﬂushable nappies con- taining baby excreta could be readily disposed through the toilet with other human wastes to be collected through the traditional method of wastewater collection, treatment and nutrient recovery systems. The main advantage is that it could be easily disposed into the toilet and there is no transportation cost and nuisance of odor. However, the main drawback is such design approach would not be compatible with existing infrastructure of urban wastewater management andsuch disposal might create huge burden on the existing wastewater management system. The immediate recovery of P and other nutrients are also not possible through this method. Disposal of ﬂushable wipes has already been reported to cause severe problem of choking/blocking of sewer lines . Therefore, such design could be consid- ered in future urban and wastewater infrastructure planning to make this compatible with increased loads. However, adequate research and risk analysis should be done to check the feasibility of implementing such system. 3.3.1.2. Designing for managing through the systematic collection and dis- posal through natural processing. This design concept require producing and using biodegradable nappies and systematic collection of the nappies after usage and disposing these to nature/land for soil amend- ment or improvement for future agriculture production. Shredding of the wipes before placing these on the soil might help to degrade these quickly. The main advantage of this method is that the nappies couldbe naturally decomposed for land improvement and nutrient recycling. This also requires lower processing and treatment cost compared to theindustrial processing/composting. The main drawbacks would be ﬁnd- ing suitable lands, transportation cost depending on the distance of the location of lands, nuisance of bad odor while transporting and ap- plying on land, and the time taken for degradation and decomposing on land. The main advantage compared to the ﬁrst option above is that excreta as well as the nappy materials are recycled, providing the ability of regeneration of P in excreta in used baby nappies. 3.3.1.3. Designing for systematic collection and disposal through industrial processing. As explained in the previous option, the production and use of 100% biodegradable nappies are required for this design concept. The used nappies containing baby excreta could be collected separately from the household and child-care centres, and transported to indus- trial facilities for processing and treatment to produce nutrient rich products like compost for agricultural use. An initiative called DYCLE in Germany provides parents with a bio-based nappy that is naturally degraded into soil and collects the used nappies for transforming into nutrient rich black soil for plant growth . The industrial composting has some advantages like handling of large volume of used nappy waste, production of high quality/stable products, removal of odor and quicker processing/treatment time ( Matter of Trust, 2021 ). It is also possible to recover energy during industrial or commer- cial scale composting . The high quality commer- cial compost product could also be sold to the market as fertilizer for agricultural use. Therefore, this option provides the opportunity to re- cover P as a nutrient in the excreta, contained in baby nappies. Some of the disadvantages of industrial processing are high establishment and operational cost, waste transportation cost, and energy use. 3.3.1.4. Designing for managing through traditional human excreta collec- tion and treatment system or through natural/industrial processing. In this approach, nappies could be designed in a way that have two layers, one for holding the absorbing layer with body made of plastic or durablematerial and the other for absorbing the urine and feces which is made of completely biodegradable materials and could be re ﬁlled every time of use. Some cloth nappies with a similar design concept are already available in the market e.g., All-in-Two style nappy ( Darlings Downunder, 2021 ). The excreta containing layer can be ﬂushed through the toilet or could be collected for natural or industrial processing, and the other layer could be recyclable or washable and reused. This ap- proach could help to substantially reduce the volume of used baby nappy wastes, while it is compatible with disposal through traditional wastewater management system, or through natural or industrial pro- cessing as explained above. 3.3.1.5. Designing for managing through household or community composting with food and garden waste and other organics. In this design concept, used biodegradable nappies could be composted at home and at community composting facilities mixing with food waste and garden waste. Co-composting of biodegradable baby nappies with other or- ganic wastes has been found to produce good quality nutrient rich end products in a number of studies ( Tsigkou et al., 2020a ;Colón et al., 2011 ;Colón et al., 2013 ). Home composting has been identi ﬁed to have a number of advantages like no collection and transportation cost, minimum infrastructure and operational cost, production of suit- able nutrient rich compost for gardening, and increasing community awareness and involvement in composting and waste management . However, this method also has some limitations like, nuisance of bad odor around household area, and risk of pathogen borne disease if not properly handled. Lleó et al.  suggested that vermicomposting method could substan- tially reduce the problem of bad odor. It is essential to perform neces- sary experiments and feasibility studies before promoting and implementing household composting of used baby nappies.R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 8 All these possible design options explained above have the potential for helping towards achieving the P circular economy of disposable baby nappies. However, considering the pros and cons of each options as we discussed, necessary life cycle and economic analysis should be per- formed to understand the environmental and economic feasibility of each option. Informed with the ﬁndings of such analysis and necessary ﬁeld investigations, the suitable option could be implemented depend- ing upon the socio-economic and environmental condition of the country. 3.3.2. Solutions from the overall life cycle management perspective Apart from considering solutions from the product and system de- sign perspectives as stated above, necessary planning should be done to ensure the sustainable management of baby nappies in its overall life cycle to ensure effective recovery of P and other nutrients. As pre- sented in Table 2 , this study proposes a conceptual plan, that might be considered in this regard. A snapshot of the key interventions required at different stages of the disposable baby nappy life cycle is presented inFig. 3 . 3.3.2.1. Interventions at the production and marketing stage. Cordella et al.  suggests that careful selection and use of materials at the pro- duction stage could reduce life cycle impacts of nappy products and as- sociated human health and environmental risks. For instance, nappies produced using biodegradable materials could be suitable for nutrient recovery through composting. Based on appropriate experiments, Colón et al.  demonstrated the potential for used compostable/ biodegradable baby nappies for producing good quality compost fertil- izers. Tsigkou et al.  developed new separation methods where the biodegradable part of the disposable used nappies could be separated from non-biodegradable parts, and co-digested that with ex- pired food waste to produce anaerobic sludge for composting to make suitable end product for land application. Another study by Ferronato et al.  also separated organic fraction of the used disposable nappies, and used that for vermicomposting with cow manure to pro-duce suitable compost fertilizers. A completely biodegradable nappy could ultimately reduce the burden of separation organic materials and thus could be readily used for composting.There are already various types of biodegradable and eco-friendly nappies  available at a reasonable price in the market, some of which are 100% biodegrad- able . Use of such nappies need to be promoted among consumers through various awareness and marketing initiatives by producers, retailers as well as the government. Research suggests that the global biodegradable nappy  market likely to grow from worth US$ 3.07 billion in 2019 to worth US$ 5.46 billion by 2026, indicating strong growth mainly driven by increased awareness about personal hygiene and increased environ- mental concerns . It should however, be noted that biodegradable materials sometimes are reported to have higher envi- ronmental impact compared to the alternatives such as plastic. 3.3.2.2. Interventions at the household/community stage. At the house- hold/community level, it is necessary to enhance the awareness about the importance of recycling P and other nutrients in baby nappies to drive them towards using biodegradable/compostable nappies. Based on an examination of the community participation in household solid waste  reduction in eastern Surabaya, Indonesia, Dhokhikah et al.  suggested a number of strategies e.g., intensifying the HSW reduction training programs, intensifying the information dissem- ination through mass media and campaign, increasing the number of environmental cadres, and optimizing the existence of waste bank and its function. Community initiatives for using biodegradable nappies and collecting those nappies after use, and composting utilizing appro- priate methods would help to recover and recycle nappy bound nutri- ents. Local government councils could run tailored waste education/ awareness programs targeting households with babies to educate them on this matter. Pickering et al.  suggests that educating res- idents about the bene ﬁts of organic waste diversion increases their be- havioral intents for participation in the waste diversion program. Initiatives for involving communities in sustainable management of dis- posable nappy waste is already underway in some parts of the world, e.g., the DYCLE initiative of Germany, as mentioned before, motivatesand supports parents to use compostable nappies through facilitating the collection of used nappies and converting into black soil for growing plants . Table 2 A life cycle management plan for achieving phosphorus circular economy of disposable baby nappies. Stages of baby nappy life cycleWhat needs to be achieved? How to achieve? Stakeholder responsible 1. Design/production Reduce life cycle environmental impact Design/production of fully compostable nappiesProper labelling of product about environmental beneﬁt Produce compostable nappies with price cheaper orcomparable to high quality nappiesEnhance LCA research and innovation for mitigating impact Incentive to producers for improving design and producingcompostable nappies Investment for improving existing design and production technologies and methodsStricter government policy/regulations for producingbiodegradable nappiesDesigners, producers and distributors of nappiesProducers and suppliers of raw materials Government bodiesUniversities or researchorganizations 2. Market/retail Enhance distribution/supply and selling of compostable nappiesReduce the supply of non-biodegradable nappiesProper marketing strategies to create sustainable market for compostble nappiesCreating awareness among shoppers/households to buycompostable nappies Government regulation/policy to ban or regulate selling of non-biodegradable nappiesOwners/managers of retail chain shopsSuppliers/distributorsGovernment bodies 3. Consumer/householdEnhance use of compostable nappies at household levelSeparate storage of used nappies to help recyclingCreating awareness among shoppers about the importance of using biodegradable nappiesGovernment policy/regulations and incentives to motivatehouseholds towards recycling of baby nappiesProvide separate storage binsHouseholds Childcare centresCommunity leadersLocal governmentauthorities 4. Waste management Separate collection/storage of baby nappies for composting Diverting nappy wastes from land ﬁll to composting facilitiesDecentralized and centralized composting facilitiesfor nappy wasteHousehold/community composting with food andother organic wastesIncentives to recycling industries for composting baby nappies Government investment for composting infrastructure/facilities for used baby nappiesDevelop and promote improved technologies for recyclingphosphorus from baby nappiesCommunity initiatives to collect and compost used nappieswith household food wastesCreating market for compost products from used baby nappiesWaste management authorities Federal/state governmentsLocal governmentauthoritiesHouseholds/consumersFertilizer sellersR.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 9 3.3.2.3. Interventions at the waste management stage. Waste management is the crucial stage that determines the ultimate fate of the used babynappies. How the used nappy wastes would be collected, processed/ treated and disposed in turn determines the fate of baby excreta bound P and other nutrients trapped in those nappies. In the traditional management system in many countries, used nappies are usually ends up in land ﬁll with other garbage, resulting in the loss of a considerable amount of P and other valuable nutrients as we assessed for Australia in this study. Although there are various types of resource recovery and recycling technologies or methods for used baby nappies are re- ported in available literature , these are mostly at lab experiment or pilot project stage. The capacity for the practical implementation of these techniques to a large scale is still lim- ited mainly due to the lack of policies and regulations for the sustainable management of P and other valuable nutrients in used baby nappy wastes. The recovery and recycling of a critical and non-renewable nutrient resource like P from human excreta is usually ignored, while the aim for managing human excreta is always to quickly keep away from human. There is a need for shift in the way of people's perception about it by recognising it as a valuable nutrient stream (as it contains a substantial amount of ﬁnite element like P), setting a clear goal for P and other nu- trient recovery, setting design goals particularly in relation to future urban planning to design a system compatible for P recovery, and ﬁnd- ing ways to manage trade-offs. Developing separate collection systems for used baby nappies as well as establishing both centralized and decentralized composting fa- cilities could allow composting of used baby nappies. Decentralized community composting of organic wastes is appearing as a promising solution for municipal solid waste management in Italy ( Bruni et al., 2020 ).Pai et al.  assessed that decentralized community composting has potential social and economic bene ﬁts along with envi- ronmental advantages. Local government authorities could take someinitiatives/programs on a trial basis to check the effectiveness of house- hold and community composting of used baby nappies with food waste and garden organics, and utilizing the compost products locally for home or community gardening. Such initiatives have the potential for not only to divert wastes from land ﬁll but also to reduce the waste transportation cost and associated environmental impacts. There is also need for developing local markets for the compost products. As cur-rently given for other recycling industries, the government could also consider providing ﬁnancial incentives and support to recycling indus- tries and community groups trying to produce compost products utiliz- ing used baby nappies. The waste management authorities also need to enhance their capability for the large-scale implementation of P recycling technologies of used disposable baby nappies to achieve a P circular economy. 4. Conclusions This study estimated that nearly 5452 tonne P was lost through the disposal of used disposable baby nappies to land ﬁlls in Australia over the period of 2001 –2019. The situation is more or less similar for other de- veloped nations, however, such quantitative analysis is currently absent for nations, emphasizing the need for a global assessment of P loss through disposable baby nappies. This study revealed that although there are various types of technologies/methods that offer nutrient recov- e r yf r o mu s e db a b yn a p p i e sp r i m a r i l yt h r o u g hc o - c o m p o s t i n gw i t hf o o d and other organic wastes, the majority of these are still being applied at the lab and pilot scales, hence, it is yet dif ﬁcult to understand the effec- tiveness before practically implementing to large/industry scale. There are also a wide range other technologies/methods for recycling baby nappies, with purpose ranging from energy recovery to volume reduction, generation of pulp, hydrogel, cellulose, and polymer as well as to increase yield stress and viscosity of concrete. This study recommends that future research and innovation should focus on developing nappy recyclingPhosphorus  circular economy of  disposable baby nappies1. Design/  production 2. Market/  retail 3. Consumer/  household4. Waste managementFinished product Purchased goodsUsed nappies Stage when P finds its way  to nappies as baby excreta  Nappy life cycleGovernment policy/  regulationsResearch and  innovation Financial incentives/  investments Creating market for  compost products Awareness and  motivation Composting infrastructure  developmentUse of improved/new technologies Marketing strategies for  compostable nappiesInterventions Fig. 3. A snapshot of the key interventions required at different stages of the disposable baby nappy life cycle to achieve P circular economy. Table 2 elaborates these interventions.R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 10 technologies and methods that are capable to ensure optimum recovery of P and other resources with minimum adverse environmental impact and at a reasonable price. The new product and system design options as well as interventions at the various stages of the nappy life cycle as proposed in this study could be utilized to achieve a P circular economy of baby nappies. Options such as designing for ﬂushing, designing for disassembling the excreta containing part, and designing for systematic collection, storage and treatment through natural or industrial processing as well as through household/community composting were evaluated along with pros and cons, hence providing guidelines for future research needs. In order to close the loop, the study speci ﬁcally recommends for the design and production of biodegradable nappies using raw materials from bamboo and cotton plants that are fertilized through compost produced from disposable baby nappy wastes. Overall, consid- ering the key interventions as suggested in this study, a coordinated and harmonized effort is required from all the stakeholders involved at var- ious stages of the nappy life cycle to ensure sustainable production, marketing, usage and recycling of disposable baby nappies to achieve sustainable management of P for food and water security. CRediT authorship contribution statement Rubel Biswas Chowdhury: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Validation, Writing –original draft, Writing –review & editing, Visualization. Mayuri Wijayasundara: Writing –review & editing, Validation, Project administration. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.149339 . References Atasa ğun, H.G., Bhat, G.S., 2020. Advancement in ﬂushable wipes: modern technologies and characterization. J. Ind. Text. 49 , 722 –747. ABC News, 2015. Dirty nappies a major contributor to waste dumped in public places in the ACT. Reported by Hannah Walmsley with Philip Clark.Available at. https://www. abc.net.au/news/2015-05-22/dirty-nappies-a-major-contributor-to-waste-in-act/ 6489538 . ABS, 2019. 3101.0 - Australian Demographic Statistics, Jun 2019. Retrieved from. Australian Bureau of Statistics, Australian Government, Canberra, Australia https:// www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/3101.0Jun%202019 . ABS, 2014. Australian Health Survey: Nutrition First Results - Foods and Nutrients, 2011- 12. Retrieved from. Australian Bureau of Statistics, Australian Government, Canberra, Australia https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/health/health-conditions-and-risks/aus- tralian-health-survey-nutrition- ﬁrst-results-foods-and-nutrients/latest-release . Almeida, S., Lourenço, V.L., Crespi, M.S., 2019. Preliminary thermal evaluation of dispos- able babies diaper viewing energy recycling. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 138 , 3679 –3687. Al-Jabari, M., Ghyadah, R.A., Alokely, R., 2019. Recovery of hydrogel from baby diaper wastes and its application for enhancing soil irrigation management. J. Environ. Manag. 239, 255 –261. Baroi, A.R., Chowdhury, R.B., Roy, B.B., Sujauddin, M., 2020. Sustainability assessment of phosphorus in the waste management system of Bangladesh using substance ﬂow analysis. J. Clean. Prod. 273, 122865. Barrena, R., Font, X., Gabarrell, X., Sánchez, A., 2014. Home composting versus industrial composting: in ﬂuence of composting system on compost quality with focus on com- post stability. Waste Manag. 34 , 1109 –1116. Brunner, P.H., Rechberger, H., 2016. Practical Handbook of Material Flow Analysis. Vol. 1. CRC press. Bruni, C., Akyol, Ç., Cipolletta, G., Eusebi, A.L., Caniani, D., Masi, S., Fatone, F., 2020. Decentralized community composting: past, present and future aspects of Italy. Sus-tainability 12 , 3319. Budyk, Y., Fullana, A., 2019. Hydrothermal carbonization of disposable diapers. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 7 , 103341.Butte, G., Niwagaba, C., Nordin, A., 2021. Assessing the microbial risk of faecal sludge use in ugandan agriculture by comparing ﬁeld and theoretical model output. Water Res. 197, 117068. Butkovic, M., 2020. The Future Of Femcare Products Is Here With Planera ’sC e r t i ﬁed Flush- able And Biodegradable Sanitary Pads.Available at. Forbes . https://www.forbes.com/sites/marijabutkovic/2020/11/23/the-future-of-femcare- products-is-here-with-planeras-certi ﬁed-ﬂushable-and-biodegradable-sanitary- pads/?sh=b8c381b2cc70 . Chowdhury, R.B., Moore, G.A., Weatherley, A.J., Arora, M., 2014. A review of recent sub- stance ﬂow analyses of phosphorus to identify priority management areas at differ- ent geographical scales. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 83, 213 –228. Chowdhury, R.B., Moore, G.A., Weatherley, A.J., Arora, M., 2016. A novel substance ﬂow analysis model for analysing multi-year phosphorus ﬂow at the regional scale. Sci. Total Environ. 572, 1269 –1280. Chowdhury, R.B., Moore, G.A., Weatherley, A.J., Arora, M., 2017. Key sustainability chal- lenges for the global phosphorus resource, their implications for global food security, and options for mitigation. J. Clean. Prod. 140, 945 –963. Colón, J., Ruggieri, L., Sánchez, A., González, A., Puig, I., 2011. Possibilities of composting disposable diapers with municipal solid wastes. Waste Manag. Res. 29 , 249 –259. Colón, J., Mestre-Montserrat, M., Puig-Ventosa, I., Sánchez, A., 2013. Performance of com- postable baby used diapers in the composting process with the organic fraction ofmunicipal solid waste. Waste Manag. 33 , 1097 –1103. Cook, H., 2021. Cash for nappies and the push to expand rebates for sanitary products. The Age.Available at:. https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/cash-for-nappies- and-the-push-to-expand-rebates-for-sanitary-products-20210423-p57lsp.html . Cordell, D., Drangert, J.O., White, S., 2009. The story of phosphorus: global food security and food for thought. Glob. Environ. Chang. 19 , 292 –305. Cordell, D., Jackson, M., White, S., 2013. Phosphorus ﬂows through the australian food sys- tem: identifying intervention points as a roadmap to phosphorus security. Environ.Sci. Pol. 29, 87 –102. Cordella, M., Bauer, I., Lehmann, A., Schulz, M., Wolf, O., 2015. Evolution of disposable baby diapers in Europe: life cycle assessment of environmental impacts and identi ﬁ- cation of key areas of improvement. J. Clean. Prod. 95, 322 –331. Darlings Downunder, 2021. Nappies: all-in-two/snap-in nappies.Available at:. https:// www.darlingsdownunder.com.au/shop/nappies/all-in-twosnap-in-nappies . Dhokhikah, Y., Trihadiningrum, Y., Sunaryo, S., 2015. Community participation in house- hold solid waste reduction in Surabaya, Indonesia. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 102, 153 –162. DYCLE, 2021. Diaper cycle.Available at:. https://dycle.org/en . Espinosa-Valdemar, R.M., Turpin-Marion, S., Delfín-Alcalá, I., Vázquez-Morillas, A., 2011. Disposable diapers biodegradation by the fungus pleurotus ostreatus. WasteManag. 31 , 1683 –1688. Espinosa-Valdemar, R.M., Sotelo-Navarro, P.X., Quecholac-Pina, X., García-Rivera, M.A., Beltrán-Villavicencio, M., Ojeda-Benítez, S., Vázquez-Morillas, A., 2014. Biological recycling of used baby diapers in a small-scale composting system. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 87, 153 –157. Ferronato, N., Nova Pinedo, M.L., Torretta, V., 2020. Assessment of used baby diapers composting in Bolivia. Sustainability 12 , 5055. Harder, R., Wielemaker, R., Larsen, T.A., Zeeman, G., Öberg, G., 2019. Recycling nutrients contained in human excreta to agriculture: pathways, processes, and products. Crit.Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49 , 695 –743. Ichiura, H., Nakaoka, H., Konishi, T., 2020. Recycling disposable diaper waste pulp after dehydrating the superabsorbent polymer through oxidation using ozone. J. Clean. Prod. 276, 123350. Imarc Group, 2019. Biodegradable diapers market: global industry trends, share, size, growth, opportunity and forecast 2021 –2026. https://www.imarcgroup.com/biode- gradable-diapers-market . Kim, K.S., Cho, H.S., 2017. Pilot trial on separation conditions for diaper recycling. Waste Manag. 67, 11 –19. Karimi, H., Yu, Q.L., Brouwers, H.J.H., 2020. Valorization of waste baby diapers in concrete. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 153, 104548. Khanyile, A., Caws, G.C., Mkhize, N.M., 2020. Characterisation study of various disposable diaper brands. Sustainability 12 , 10437. Khoo, S.C., Phang, X.Y., Ng, C.M., Lim, K.L., Lam, S.S., Ma, N.L., 2019. Recent technologies for treatment and recycling of used disposable baby diapers. Process Saf. Environ. Prot.123, 116 –129. Khoo, S.C., Ma, N.L., Peng, W.X., Kei, N.K., Goh, M.S., Chen, H.L., Sonne, C., 2021. Valorisation of biomass and diaper waste into a sustainable production of the medical mushroom lingzhi ganoderma lucidum. Chemosphere 131477. Lam, S.S., Mahari, W.A.W., Ma, N.L., Azwar, E., Kwon, E.E., Peng, W., Park, Y.K., 2019. Micro- wave pyrolysis valorization of used baby diaper. Chemosphere 230, 294 –302. Lleó, T., Albacete, E., Barrena, R., Font, X., Artola, A., Sánchez, A., 2013. Home and vermicomposting as sustainable options for biowaste management. J. Clean. Prod. 47, 70 –76. Ma, N.L., Khoo, S.C., Peng, W., Ng, C.M., Teh, C.H., Park, Y.K., Lam, S.S., 2020. Green applica- tion and toxic risk of used diaper and food waste as growth substitute for sustainablecultivation of oyster mushroom . J. Clean. Prod. 268, 122272. Markets Insider, 2018. Global Diaper Market 2017-2022: Adult & Baby Diapers.Available at:. PR Newswire, Dublin . https://markets.businessinsider. com/news/stocks/global-diaper-market-2017-2022-adult-baby-diapers- 1012529342 . Matter of Trust, 2021. The bene ﬁts of industrial composting.Available at. https:// matteroftrust.org/the-bene ﬁts-of-industrial-composting/ .R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 11 Mendoza, J.M.F., D'Aponte, F., Gualtieri, D., Azapagic, A., 2019. Disposable baby diapers: Life cycle costs, eco-ef ﬁciency and circular economy. J. Clean. Prod. 211, 455 –467. Metson, G.S., Powers, S.M., Hale, R.L., Sayles, J.S., Öberg, G., MacDonald, G.K., Bouwman, A.F., 2018. Socio-environmental consideration of phosphorus ﬂows in the urban san- itation chain of contrasting cities. Reg. Environ. Chang. 18 , 1387 –1401. Mihelcic, J.R., Fry, L.M., Shaw, R., 2011. Global potential of phosphorus recovery from human urine and feces. Chemosphere 84 , 832 –839. Ng, F.S.F., Muthu, S.S., Li, Y., Hui, P.C.L., 2013. A critical review on life cycle assessment studies of diapers. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43 , 1795 –1822. Nobel, B., Han, S.H., 2020. Method for nutrient solution extraction from used diposed di- apers. J. Energy Eng. 29 , 34 –41. Pai, S., Ai, N., Zheng, J., 2019. Decentralized community composting feasibility analysis for residential food waste: a Chicago case study. Sustain. Cities Soc. 50, 101683. Patchell, J., 2012. What&apos;s choking our sewer lines? Plumbing Connection, (Winter 2012), p. 80 Pickering, G.J., Pickering, H.M., Northcotte, A., Habermebl, C., 2020. Participation in resi- dential organic waste diversion programs: motivators and optimizing educational messaging. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 158, 104807. Rahman, S., Chowdhury, R.B., D ’Costa, N.G., Milne, N., Bhuiyan, M., Sujauddin, M., 2019. Determining the potential role of the waste sector in decoupling of phosphorus: a comprehensive review of national scale substance ﬂow analyses. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 144, 144 –157. Roy, B.B., Biswas Chowdhury, R., Baroi, A.R., Rahman, S., Powers, S.M., Milne, N., Sujauddin, M., 2019. Unravelling the anthropogenic pathways of phosphorus in the food produc- tion and consumption system of Bangladesh through the lens of substance ﬂow anal- ysis. J. Ind. Ecol. 23 , 1439 –1455. Smith, M.M., Aber, J.D., 2018. Energy recovery from commercial-scale composting as a novel waste management strategy. Appl. Energy 211, 194 –199.Sustainability Victoria, 2021. Eco-friendlier Alternatives to Disposable Nappies. Available at: Sustainability Victoria, Melbourne Victoria 3000 . https:// www.sustainability.vic.gov.au/nappies . Thomson, L., 2020. Flushable sanitary pads are now a thing and you can try them for free. Metro, UK. Available at: https://metro.co.uk/2020/10/01/ ﬂushable-sanitary-pads- are-now-a-thing-and-you-can-try-them-for-free-13355627/ (accessed: 24/04/ 2021). Trilokesh, C., Bavadharani, P., Mahapriyadarshini, M., Janani, R., Uppuluri, K.B., 2020. Recycling baby diaper waste into cellulose and nanocellulose. Waste Biomass Valoriz. 1–8. Tsigkou, K., Zagklis, D., Tsafrakidou, P., Za ﬁri, C., Kornaros, M., 2020a. Composting of an- aerobic sludge from the co-digestion of used disposable nappies and expired food products. Waste Manag. 118, 655 –666. Tsigkou, K., Tsafrakidou, P., Za ﬁri, C., Beobide, A.S., Kornaros, M., 2020b. Pretreatment of used disposable nappies: super absorbent polymer deswelling. Waste Manag. 112, 20–29. Van der Voet, E., 2002. Substance ﬂow analysis methodology. A Handbook of Industrial Ecology, pp. 91 –101. Vázquez, M.A., Soto, M., 2017. The ef ﬁciency of home composting programmes and com- post quality. Waste Manag. 64, 39 –50. Zagklis, D., Papadionysiou, M., Tsigkou, K., Tsafrakidou, P., Za ﬁri, C., Kornaros, M., 2021. Ef- fect of pH on the economic potential of dark fermentation products from used dispos- able nappies and expired food products. Appl. Sci. 11 , 4099. Zekry, M., Nassar, I., Salim, H., Abdallah, A., 2020. The potential of super absorbent poly- mers from diaper wastes to enhance water retention properties of the soil. Soil Envi-ron. 39 . Zulﬁkar, W.A., 2019. Decomposition Process of Disposable Baby Diapers in Organic Waste with Takakura Method.R.B. Chowdhury and M. Wijayasundara Science of the Total Environment 799  149339 12 

