Advancing A Circular  Economy A Future without Waste? Stephen M Jones Advancing a Circular Economy Stephen M Jones Advancing a Circular  Economy A Future without Waste? ISBN 978-3-030-66563-0     ISBN 978-3-030-66564-7   https://doi.or g/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7 © The Editor  and The Author, under exclusive licence to Springer  Nature Switzerland AG 2021 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the  Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of  translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on  microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval,  electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now  known or hereafter developed. The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this  publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are  exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information  in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the   publisher nor the authors or the editors give a war ranty, expressed or implied, with respect to  the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The  publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and   institutional affiliations. Cover pattern © Melisa Hasan This Palgrave Pivot imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature  Switzerland AG. The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, SwitzerlandStephen M Jones Business School University of Queensland St Lucia, QLD, Australia For my mother Hilda Jones  Amor gignit amorem viiAn appreciation of the potential value of waste was perhaps sparked in my  childhood. As a young boy I would take a monthly drive with my father,  after working in the garden and cleaning out the garage, to the local tip  . I could not help but notice that the man who operated the tip  drove a new shiny red Porsche sports car, which he proudly parked at the  entry. As a ten-year-old I thought it incongruous that the man at the tip  could afford to buy one of the most expensive cars in the world. ‘There  must be money in all that rubbish we are throwing away’, my father would  often muse as we drove in. In 2020, things have changed, now my waste  is collected each week by a very large truck that belongs to a multinational  firm under contract to the local municipal government. The local tip is like  a fortress with high fences, restricted access, ‘no go’ areas and staff in  high-visibility clothing. The man at the tip has been replaced by investors  on the share market. The new mantra for waste is that it is a resource that  needs to be maximised rather than dumped. Waste is something we all  generate; modern life seems to be impossible without it. What happens to  our waste is increasingly integral to the future of life on the planet. The idea for this book comes from time spent in the Belgian city of  Leuven. In 2017 and 2018, I spent time at the KU Leuven as a research  fellow. It was the lived experience of the city and its waste management  system that was life changing in many respects. My partner and I were  fortunate to stay at university accommodation, the Groot Begijnhof, in  the historic quarter. Leuven is part of the Flanders region, and the house - hold sorting of waste is a legislated requirement—there are financial pen - alties for non-compliance. Part of our daily routine was to sort our waste Preface viii PREFACE into different coloured bags—one for food, one for plastics, one for gen - eral waste, and separate paper and cardboard. At first this separation rou - tine was a shock as we were accustomed to kerbside mixed waste collection  and centralised sorting facilities in our hometown of Brisbane in Australia.  After a short period, we came to prefer the Flanders model; we believed  we were taking responsibility and even began determining our purchases  that would fit into the separation scheme easily, and we even began reduc - ing our consumption. Each week someone wheeling a handcart would  walk the cobbled streets of the Begijnhof—no vehicles allowed—and  remove our waste if it was separated correctly; if not, it was left behind  with a note requesting we correct the problem. The fact that this lived  experience forced us to think about our waste habits and to change our  behaviour sparked my research interest. The experience also reinforced the  view that government policy has a role to play in bringing about the  change needed to establish sustainable approaches that reduce our impact  on the planet. My sincere thanks go to Professor Brian Head for his encouragement  to write this book. His valuable feedback on my development of the theo - retical framework gave the project added importance. His recognition of  the significance of waste as a policy problem also buoyed me when I began  questioning the value of my contribution. Thanks also to Professor Geert  Bouckaert, who has always supported my research ideas and helped me  understand the essence of politics in Belgium. In this case he also intro - duced me to senior managers in the Belgian recycling industry. I also owe  gratitude to Associate Professor Jon Hovland Honerud for providing me  with important insights into the unique aspects of the Norwegian political  system. My greatest gratitude and dedication goes to my partner Anna,  who inspires and supports my ambitions and keeps me focused when  doubts seem overwhelming. I am always grateful for the support I receive from the Business School  at the University of Queensland. It is hard to imagine a more supportive  environment for intellectual endeavours, particularly over the challenges  we all faced in 2020. Brisbane, QLD, Australia  Stephen Jones ix 1   Introduction    1  2   Waste Management: A Policy Paradox   15  3   The Promise of the Circular   41  4   The Challenge of Political Priority   61  5   Waste Management in Belgium   89  6   Waste Management in Norway  111  7   Synthesis and Conclusions: Unsustainable Status Quo?  141   Index  167contents xiList of figures Fig. 2.1  Municipal waste generation intensities per capita   18 Fig. 2.2  Municipal waste management, by type of tr eatment, 2015  21 Fig. 2.3  Global Plastic Pr oduction 1950–2015   23 Fig. 3.1  The conventional open-  ended economy   43 Fig. 3.2  The simplified closed-loop cir cular economy   43 Fig. 3.3  Municipal waste tr eatment, EU + Switzerland, Norway and  Iceland (Source: CEWEP , Graph on European Waste  Management 2015. In www.cewep.eu/information/data/ graphs/index.html)  46 Fig. 3.4  The impact of cir cular business models on the linear economy    50 Fig. 3.5  OECD Sur vey on circular economy in cities and regions   53 Fig. 5.1  Competent authority for waste management in Flanders    92 Fig. 5.2  Trend in reusable packaging, all Val-I-Pac members 2003–2017    100 Fig. 5.3  Trends in residual waste Flanders 1990–2015   100 Fig. 5.4  Recycling of packaging location   101 Fig. 6.1  Total waste is still going up   125 Fig. 6.2  Waste in Norway by source   126 Fig. 6.3  Shipment of hazar dous waste from EU member states and  EFTA countries, 2001–2016.    127 Fig. 6.4  Hazar dous waste in Norway   128 xiiiList of tabLes Table 3.1  EU waste management tar gets 2020–2035   47 Table 3.2  Select policy instr uments  51 Table 3.3  Common bar riers to circular business model adoption and  potential policy response   55 Table 4.1  Framework on dimensions of political priority setting  65 Table 4.2  Implementation bar riers: Political   barriers   67 Table 5.1  Waste Treatment in the EU, % of total, 2016   99 Table 5.2  Municipal waste generated in selected years, 1995–2017 (kg  per capita)   103 Table 6.1  Norway industry roadmap response (Nordic Council of  Ministers  2020)  119 Table 6.2  EU cir cular economy measures 2006–2018: Norway    129 Table 6.3  Household waste in Nor way   130 1 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7_1CHAPTER 1 Introduction Abstract  This chapter pr ovides context for the arguments of the book. It  outlines the current situation contributing to an international crisis in  waste management. It provides some insights into contemporary  approaches to waste management policy by governments. The interest in  advancing a circular economy to provide the possible solutions to waste  management practices that contribute the current crisis is also raised. The  conclusion outlines the basic structure of the book and justifications for  the analysis and the approach taken. Keywords  Waste management crisis • Circular economy • Sustainability  • Public policy 1.1  A W Aste Crisis This book is about an escalating modern-day crisis: our inability to man - age our waste in a sustainable way. In 2015, the UN Environment  Programme made the stirring declaration in the language of social justice  that waste management underpins society in the twenty-first century.  Appropriate sanitation and solid waste management aligns with potable  water, shelter, food, energy, transport and communications as essential to  society and to the economy as a whole . World Bank data  shows 2.01 billion tonnes of municipal solid waste  was generated  2 worldwide in 2016 and at least 33% was not managed in an environmen - tally safe manner . By 2050, the world is  expected to increase waste generation by 70%, to 3.40 billion tonnes of  waste annually . One impact of this scenario is the  proliferation of plastic in the waste stream. Current predictions show that,  even with ‘immediate concerted action’, plastic waste alone will be enter - ing global marine ecosystems at triple current volumes in the next 20 years  . Evidence shows the detrimental effects of plastic pollu- tion including ingestion by sea creatures leading to economic costs on  fishing, tourism and shipping industries. Micro plastic waste is now mov - ing through the human food system and has become discoverable in  human organs . Equally significant is the environmen - tal pressure arising from household consumption now recognised as con - tributing to more than 60% of global greenhouse gas emissions and  between 50% and 80% of total land, material, and water use (Ivanova et al.  2016 ). Methods of dealing with our waste are failing to prevent significant  environmental damage and we need to give priority to identifying  sustainable practices that will help to reduce our impact on ecological  systems critical to our long-term survival. One of the most significant events to raise attention to the current mal - aise occurred in the early months of 2018 when the Chinese government,  as part of its National Sword Policy, imposed a ban on the importation of  various forms of waste from Europe, North America and Asia. In 2017,  European countries alone had exported over two billion metric tonnes of  plastic waste to China . Most of the waste material  shipped was sold in a system of international markets trading in recyclable  materials. The Chinese government argued that much of the waste they  received was contaminated and not suitable for recycling—exporting  countries had failed to sort the waste appropriately (Smyth 2018 ; Freytas- Tamura 2018 ). As a result of the Chinese ban, many governments and  citizens in developed countries suddenly discovered the results of their  efforts to recycle had actually been shipped to developing countries, and  often dumped in rivers and oceans as a result of poor waste management  practices . Contributing to the Chinese ban was the revelation that waste was  being processed in many developed countries, such as Canada and the  UK, by private contractors and they were sending waste offshore without  government monitoring or approval . Primarily  however, waste was exported because it had a higher market value than  S. M. JONES 3 any other method of processing it. The ban created a domino effect with  other developing countries following China’s lead by refusing to take  waste from developed countries. Some, like Malaysia, shipped the waste  back to the source countries, for example Spain . These  bans exposed many developed countries’ failure to establish their own  recycling capabilities, as they preferred to maintain traditional waste  management methods of landfill and incineration. The US and Australia  are typical examples where recycling remains underdeveloped and marginal  in the absence of specific regulations. Because of the preference for  exporting waste from these countries, less than 10% of plastic waste is  recycled locally . Challenges for governments are set  to continue as the Chinese government will ban all imports of solid waste  from 2021 and will no longer accept or approve import applications for  solid waste. On a global scale, 193 countries, both developed and developing, have  committed to achieving the UNDP’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals   . The UN SDG 12 is ‘to promote responsible  consumption and production’. It is the idea that production and  consumption have created volumes of waste that threaten the existence of  humanity that is forcing an examination of alternatives to dump and run  approaches. Vidal  argues that there is no way to make current  levels of consumption sustainable. Arrangements between government  and industry to reduce volumes of waste and to establish materials that can  be reused and recycled more easily have failed to achieve the necessary  improvements and to achieve the progress required by the SDGs. The  most recent progress report on the SDGs makes this clear: Globally, the generation of waste is mounting. About one third of the food  produced for human consumption each year is lost or wasted, most of it in  developed countries. Urgent action is needed to ensure that current material  needs do not lead to over-extraction of resources and further degradation of  the environment. Policies must be embraced to improve resource efficiency,  reduce waste and mainstream sustainability practices across all sectors of the  economy.  The current situation works in favour of vested interests as one observer  claims; ‘Far from saving the planet, waste management is now a $200  billion industry that’s become an environmental disaster’ (Financial Times  2020 ). A recent survey of consumers in South-East Asia found that 91% 1 INTRODUCTION   4 were concerned about plastic waste but were not changing their purchasing  habits. Up to 80% of businesses have set voluntary targets to address  plastic waste but less than one-third actually communicate that target.  Less than half are part of industry-wide voluntary collaborations to tackle  plastic waste. There is an expectation by both business and consumers that  governments should take stronger action including mandating waste  segregation, enhancing collection systems and imposing fines on littering  . The waste crisis has created a sense of urgency towards identifying  actions that governments can take to establish more sustainable approaches  to manage waste . One solution  promoted by many governments is a paradigm shift from the established  linear economy, based on take, make and dispose principles, towards  sustainable approaches developed in a circular economy. The idea of  circular economy is of great interest to both researchers and practitioners  as it is seen to reinvigorate interest in the concept of sustainability.  Proposals for circular approaches require a distinct shift away from long-   term linear practices that include one of capitalisms driving principles— planned obsolescence. A circular approach is promoted as one where  products can be designed better to last longer; food chains and toymakers  don’t have to make poor-quality goods; producers can use fewer virgin  raw materials; waste can be made a resource. With such changes it is  argued a circular economy can begin to be developed. To achieve these  outcomes, government policies can help make corporations more  responsible in terms of their impact on natural resources and the  environment generally. 1.2  AdvAnCing A CirCulAr eConomy Governments tend to promote the circular economy as a blueprint for  reform of waste management that encourages the 3Rs approach of reduce,  reuse and recycle in the waste hierarchy, thus complying with public  interest in sustainability: this is where significant challenges exist.  Corporations and governments that are in the business of growth do not  necessarily want to address sustainability issues created by consumption.  But they do want to focus on aspects of waste that may create economic  opportunities. In this paradigm, waste is increasingly framed by  governments as a resource to be exploited. With a growing business  interest in the resource argument, government waste policy can focus on  S. M. JONES 5 a number of contemporary problems simultaneously: the increasing  scarcity and prices of raw materials , and a  consequential decrease in industrial productivity, along with an ever-   growing volume of waste . The valorisation of waste as a  resource has, for many scholars, become an integral element of the interest  of business in waste management and the promotion of circularity  . In 2015, the UN advocated taking a holistic approach towards waste  management and recognising waste and resource management as a  significant contributor to sustainable development and climate change  mitigation. The UN recognised a need for addressing governance issues  which help to establish sustainable solutions—including the regulatory  and other policy instruments, the partnerships and the financing models  . Existing voluntary approaches suffer in many instances  from poorly specified objectives and inadequate performance data. In the  absence of explicitly articulated regulatory or market-based measures,  voluntary initiatives have been less ambitious and less economically  efficient than the more conventional policy alternatives. European  experience indicates that voluntary policies can work quite effectively if  complemented by public policy instruments like regulations, taxes or  tradable permits . The Organisation for Economic  Co-operation and Development  and the European Union   have been advocates of the transition to circular approaches to establish  sustainable economic development. In considering the opportunities and  challenges of a circular economy from a policy perspective the OECD  observes ‘Circular business models use already existing materials and  products as inputs and therefore their environmental footprint tends to be  considerably smaller than that for traditional business models’ (OECD  2019 ). EU surveys of circular strategies at each level of government claims  that ‘waste processing is an almost essential element in any circular  economy strategy’ . Further to this, the EU suggests  that waste processing and particularly municipal waste management are  common issues affecting whole national territories’ ‘opportunities to  improve it largely depend on legislative issues at national or European  level’ . A move to a more sustainable society requires greater sophistication to  manage waste . A lot of time and money needs to be spent  by government and industry educating residents on the value of sorting  waste in the household . Of course, residents 1 INTRODUCTION   6 need to be on side and be willing to participate. Challenges need to be  faced by individual consumers as the generators of waste. They must  assume a high degree of responsibility for placing contaminants into the  recycling system that the waste management system must deal with  . If residents have been accustomed to the ease of  centralised sorting, a move to more complexity and effort becomes  challenging. Petts  argues that the most effective management of  waste has to relate to the local environmental, economic and social  priorities. Surveys suggest that there is a willingness within communities  to take more responsibility for waste; in Europe this is particularly strong.  Surveys by the European Commission show that waste is of concern to  Europeans, with 80% of those surveyed wanting their country to waste less  . When the survey research was released, the EU  Environment Commissioner Janez Potoc ̌nik claimed: Waste clearly touches a nerve: Europeans want to waste less, and they are  making efforts to practise what they preach. This makes moving to a more  circular economy a logical step forward. The appetite for more recycling is  there: now we need to deliver the mechanisms to help it happen.  The crisis in the recycling industry has created a degree of disquiet in  many countries where citizens had a level of trust in governments and  their waste management systems. When asked about ways to encourage  more recycling, 71% of respondents to a European Commission survey on  the issue say reassurance that their waste is effectively recycled would  persuade them to separate more of their waste. A majority favours more  and better waste recycling and composting facilities in their area   . Research evidence by Nilsson and Harring   supports this information. They found that ‘institutional trust levels of  individuals and trustworthiness of the third-party enforcer in the dilemma  context should be considered important factors for recycling behaviour’.  The threat to this trust in institutions created by the current crisis could  be an opportunity to promote change. The policy change literature  maintains that a crisis can become the catalyst for governments to focus on  alternative approaches to policy problems (Kingdon and Stano 1984 ;  Birkland 2006 ; Boin et al. 2009 ; Cairney and Jones 2016 ). The literature  also makes it clear that policy change requires political priority (Arts et al.  2006 ; Shiffman and Smith 2007 ; Baker et  al. 2017 ; Jones 2020 ).  Governments need to commit resources and implement regulatory  S. M. JONES 7 measures. The examination of policy change in waste management,  particularly in multilevel systems, involves understanding the political and  institutional context, the role of key actors in the policy process, the role  of ideas in shaping public acceptance for change and influence of the  characteristics of waste as a policy issue. Recent academic assessments of circular economy initiatives suggest the  vast majority focus on recycling activities without major commitments to  the other Rs in the waste hierarchy—reduce and reuse (Van den Berghe  et al. 2020 ). Such observations raise questions about genuine commitments  to a circular economy beyond business opportunity and politically charged  debates that focus on economic prosperity. Analysis that takes a sociological  and philosophical perspective argues that the circular economy provides a  powerful narrative that supports a transition to more sustainable  production and consumption systems .  Kirchherr et  al.  argue that despite its attractiveness the circular  economy has largely remained elusive in terms of precise meaning. This  lack of precision means the idea is contested and can be captured by policy  and business advocacy groups . There have been  some attempts by researchers to provide directions for policymakers to  understand the consequences as well as the support needed to promote  circular approaches . Survey research of firms reveals  a delicate balance where government regulations, standards and procedure  can be either a significant barrier or a facilitator in implementing circular  activities . Well-designed and -implemented public policy can potentially change  both business practice and citizen behaviour towards environmental out - comes . Current approaches need  to be reconsidered if governments are to support establishing more sus - tainable development. Policies and legislative instruments across the EU  established to promote sustainability focus primarily on potential eco - nomic benefits; social benefits tend to be overlooked. Of the 262 policies  examined in 2019, 63% discuss the impact on air, soil and water pollution,  45% on waste reduction and 43% on greenhouse gas emissions (UNDESA  2019 ). A possible reason for these inconsistencies is that both governments  and business tend to favour voluntary measures above those that are regu - lated and compulsory . A common view is that busi - ness is willing to support environmental outcomes if they do not impact  on profit . Evidence suggests that voluntary approaches  have so far proven to be largely ineffective, and regulatory action will be 1 INTRODUCTION   8 required in resolving environmental challenges posed by current waste  management practices . This is particularly  true for non-binding voluntary agreements that are common in dealing  with greenhouse gas emissions and waste management .  Transition to a circular economy will require a regulatory contribution by  governments. It seems clear that business as usual for managing waste is no  longer possible. A shift to circular approaches will require policy priority  that is reflected in regulatory measures that help support business transi - tion away from the linear model of production, consumption and disposal. 1.3  Book stru Cture The objective of this book is to outline a multi-theoretical framework  designed to help understand the complexities and challenges associated  with establishing priority for policy change towards waste management  and advancing a circular economy. The approach taken in each chapter is  as follows. Chapter 1 will outline a more in-depth analysis of the nature  of waste management and the prevailing crisis. In Chap. 2, the circular  economy is discussed in terms of its requirements and the challenges of  implementation. Chapter 3 deals with the nature of political priority as  one of the important contributions of this research. If we are to move  towards a circular economy, then we need to understand the challenges  in bringing about policy change. If we accept the central role of govern - ments to bring about policy change, then we need to understand oppor - tunities and limitations to reform the current waste management processes  to those of a circular economy. Another key consideration of this research  is the challenges present in multilevel systems where responsibility for  waste management policy and implementation can be shared between  different levels of government and their impact on prioritising policy  change. Chapters 4 and 5 will present case study evidence to highlight the  importance of political priority in the context of multilevel systems. First  is the approach taken in Belgium, and particularly in Flanders, the largest  and most populous region. Belgium adopted a national circular strategy  in June 2014, earlier than many of the other EU countries, followed by  the Belgian regions of Brussels and Flanders in 2017 . This  will show the extent of the political commitment and actions taken by  Belgium in achieving some of the highest rates of recycling of municipal  waste in the world. The Belgian example is not perfect, but it is illustra - tive of the extent to which governments in multilevel systems need to  S. M. JONES 9 maintain policy priority in order to improve waste processing to more  sustainable levels. The next chapter focuses on Norway as a widely viewed  leader in waste management. The Norwegian approach to recycling plas - tic is heralded as a model for other countries . This case  highlights the importance of institutional context and the role of policy  actors in shaping government responses in a multilevel system. Norway is  not a member of the EU but the national government continues to make  statements about achieving the standards of waste management agreed to  by the European Parliament, including adopting circular approaches to  waste management. Yet despite national political statements supporting  the benefits of the circular economy, the enthusiasm has not transferred  to a policy priority for establishing a national circular strategy. The reality  reveals Norway as one of the top five generators of hazardous waste in  Europe at over 300 kg/year/capita . Norwegian house - holds also have one of the highest levels of per capita municipal waste  generation in Europe . Norwegian municipal governments also  contract out much of their waste management to the private sector and  export much of this waste for incineration. It is an important case in this  respect as it helps to reveal the challenge of political priority in the con - text of intergovernmental relations. In the final chapter, the political pri - ority framework is applied to bring together the issues revealed in the case  studies and draws insights for governments advocating circular approaches. referen Ces Anton, W. R. Q., Deltas, G., & Khanna, M. . Incentives for environmental  self-regulation and implications for environmental performance. Journal of  Environmental Economics and Management, 48 , 632–654. Arts, B., Leroy, P., & Van Tatenhove, J. . Political modernisation and policy  arrangements: A framework for understanding environmental policy change.  Public Organization Review, 6 , 93–106. Baker, P., Gill, T., Friel, S., Carey, G., & Kay, A. . Generating political prior - ity for regulatory interventions targeting obesity prevention: An Australian case  study. Social Science & Medicine, 177 , 141–149. Banerjee, S. B. . Managerial perceptions of corporate environmentalism:  Interpretations from industry and strategic implications for organizations.  Journal of Management Studies, 38 , 489–513. Bauwens, T., Hekkert, M., & Kirchherr, J. . Circular futures: What will they  look like? Ecological Economics, 175 , 106703.1 INTRODUCTION   10 Birkland, T. A. . Lessons of disaster: Policy change after catastrophic events .  Georgetown University Press. Boin, A., ‘t Hart, P., & McConnell, A. . Crisis exploitation: Political and  policy impacts of framing contests. Journal of European Public Policy ,  16, 81–106. Borck, J.  C., & Coglianese, C. . Voluntary environmental programs:  Assessing their effectiveness. Annual Review of Environment and Resources,  34, 305–324. Cairney, P., & Jones, M. D. . Kingdon’s multiple streams approach: What  is the empirical impact of this universal theory? Policy Studies Journal,  44, 37–58. Carrington, D. . Microplastic particles now discoverable in human  organs. The Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/envi- ronment/2020/aug/17/microplastic-  particles-  discovered-  in- human-    organs . d’Ambrières, W. . Plastics recycling worldwide: Current overview and desir - able changes. Field Actions Science Reports. The Journal of Field Actions  (Special  Issue 19), 12–21. De Angelis, R., & Ianulardo, G. . Circular economy as fictional expectation  to overcome societal addictions. Where do we stand? Philosophy of Management,  19, 133–153. Ding, Z., Jiang, X., Liu, Z., Long, R., Xu, Z., & Cao, Q. . Factors affecting  low-carbon consumption behaviour of urban residents: A comprehensive  review. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 132 , 3–15. Ellen Macarthur Foundation . . Towards the circular economy.  Economic and business rationale for an accelerated transition . Cowes, UK: Ellen  Macarthur Foundation. EU Reporter. . Environment: 80% of Europeans want their country to waste  less. Retrieved from https://www.eureporter.co/environment/2014/06/30/ environment-  80- of- europeans-  want-  their-  country-  to- waste-  less/. European Commission . . Attitudes of Europeans towards waste man - agement and resource efficiency: Report. Flash Eurobrometer 388. Retrieved  from https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-  detail/-  /publication/ e3932343-  3c82-  4a5f-  8a1a-  e22eafd050a6 . European Economic and Social Committee . . Circular economy  strategies and roadmaps in Europe . Retrieved from https://www.eesc.europa. eu/en/our-  work/publications-  other-  work/publications/circular-    economy-  strategies-  and- roadmaps-  europe-  study . Financial Times. . The global recycling crisis . Retrieved from https://www. ft.com/trashtrade . S. M. JONES 11 Freytas-Tamura, K. . Plastics pile up as China refuses to take the West’s  recycling. New York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes. com/2018/01/11/world/china-  recyclables-  ban.html . Garcés-Ayerbe, C., Rivera-Torres, P., Suárez-Perales, I., & Leyva-de la Hiz,  D. I. . Is it possible to change from a linear to a circular economy? An  overview of opportunities and barriers for European small and medium-sized  enterprise companies. International Journal of Environmental Research and  Public Health, 16 , 851. Glachant, M. . Non-binding voluntary agreements. Journal of  Environmental Economics and Management, 54 , 32–48. Ivanova, D., Stadler, K., Steen-Olsen, K., Wood, R., Vita, G., Tukker, A., &  Hertwich, E.  G. . Environmental impact assessment of household  consumption. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 20 , 526–536. Jones, S. . Establishing political priority for regulatory interventions in  waste management in Australia. Australian Journal of Political Science,  55, 211–227. Kingdon, J. W., & Stano, E. . Agendas, alternatives, and public policies .  Boston: Little, Brown. Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., & Hekkert, M. . Conceptualizing the circular  economy: An analysis of 114 definitions. Resources, Conservation and Recycling,  127, 221–232. Korhonen, J., Nuur, C., Feldmann, A., & Birkie, S. E. . Circular economy  as an essentially contested concept. Journal of Cleaner Production, 175 , 544–552. Lau, W. W., Shiran, Y., Bailey, R. M., Cook, E., Stuchtey, M. R., Koskella, J., Velis,  C. A., Godfrey, L., Boucher, J., Murphy, M. B., & Thompson, R. C. .  Evaluating scenarios toward zero plastic pollution. Science . https://doi. org/10.1126/science.aba9475 . Muranko, Z., Andrews, D., Newton, E. J., Chaer, I., & Proudman, P. . The  Pro-Circular Change Model : Proposing a framework facilitating  behavioural change towards a circular economy. Resource Conservation and  Recycling, 135 , 132–140. NCM . . Sustainable consumption and pro - duction: An analysis of Nordic progress towards SDG12, and the way ahead .  Retrieved from http://norden.diva-  portal.org/smash/record. jsf?pid=diva2%3A1231011&dswid=-  3877 . Nilsson, F., & Harring, N. . The large-scale collective action dilemma of  recycling: Exploring the role of trust . Working Paper: 15. Quality of Government  Institute, University of Gothenberg. OECD. . Business models for the circular economy . Retrieved from https:// www.oecd.org/environment/business-  models-  for- the- circular-  economy-   g2g9dd62-  en.htm .1 INTRODUCTION   12 OVAM. . Implementation Plan for household waste and comparable indus - trial waste—Summary.  Retrieved from https://www.ovam.be/sites/default/ files/atoms/files/UitvoeringsplanHuishoudelijkenGelijkaardigBedrijfsafval_ LR_2017_Engelstalig.pdf . Paton, B. . Voluntary environmental initiatives and sustainable industry. In  P.  In ten Brink , Voluntary environmental agreements  .  Routledge. Petts, J. . Municipal waste management: Inequities and the role of delibera - tion. Risk Analysis, 20 , 821–832. Rabson, M. . Canada hasn’t issued any permits for companies to ship waste,  government says. CBC.  Retrieved from https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/ garbage-  recycle-  permits-  mckenna-  1.5154278 . Regions for Recycling . . Good practice Flanders: PAYT. Retrieved  from https://www.regions4recycling.eu/upload/public/Good-  Practices/ GP_OVAM_PAYT.pdf . Reuters. . Malaysia to send 3000 tonnes of plastic waste back to countries of  origin . Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/article/us-  malaysia-  waste/ malaysia-  to- send-  3000-  tonnes-  of- plastic-  waste-  back-  to- countries-  of- origin-   idUSKCN1SY0M7 . Ricci-Jurgensen, M., Gilbert, J., & Ramola, A. . Global Assessment of  municipal organic waste production and recycling . ISWA.  Retrieved from  https://www.iswa.org/media/publications/knowledge-  base/?tx_ iswaknowledgebase_filter%5Bcategories%5D=21&cHash=bd92c97529700f89 8b221bc220a39abd . Ross, A. . UK household plastic found in illegal dumps in Malaysia.  Unearthed . Retrieved from https://unearthed.greenpeace.org/2018/10/21/ uk- household-  plastics-  found-  in- illegal-  dumps-  in- malaysia/ . Santor, D. A., Fethi, I., & McIntee, S. E. . Restricting our consumption of  material goods: An application of the theory of planned behaviour. Sustainability,  12, 2–13. Savini, F. . The economy that runs on waste: Accumulation in the circular  city. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 21 , 675–691. Seadon, J. K. . Sustainable waste management systems. Journal of Cleaner  Production, 18 , 1639–1651. Shiffman, J., & Smith, S. . Generation of political priority for global health  initiatives: A framework and case study of maternal mortality. The Lancet,  370, 1370–1379. Smyth, J. . China ban on contaminated waste leaves Australia awash in rub - bish. Financial Times . Retrieved from https://www.ft.com/content/  54749bae-  fe9f- 11e8-  aebf-  99e208d3e521 . S. M. JONES 13 Sparrow, J. . Recycling: How corporate Australia played us for mugs. The  Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ commentisfree/2018/jul/19/its-  not- recycling-  its- collecting-  how-  australians-    were-  sucked-  into- the- crisis. Taylor, M. . Can Norway help us solve the plastic crisis, one bottle at a  time? The Guardian.  Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/ environment/2018/jul/12/can-  norway-  help-  us- solve-  the- plastic-    crisis-  one- bottle-  at- a- time. Thornton, T. . Don’t just blame government and business for the recycling  crisis—It begins with us. The Conversation . Retrieved from https:// theconversation.com/dont-  just-  blame-  government-  and-  business-  for-   the- recycling-  crisis-  it- begins-  with-  us- 121241 . UNDESA. . The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2019 . Retrieved  from https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2019/ . UNEP. . Global waste management outlook . Retrieved from https://scholar. google.com.au/scholar?start=30&q=voluntary+environmental+agreements& hl=en&as_sdt=0,5 . UNEP. . Report: Consumers and business concerned about plastic waste but  expect governments to do more . Retrieved from https://www.unenvironment. org/news-  and-  stories/press-  release/report-  consumers-  and-  business-    concerned-  about-  plastic-  waste-  expect . United Nations Development Programme . . World leaders adopt  sustainable development goals.  Retrieved from https://www.undp.org/ content/undp/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2015/09/24/undp-   welcomes-  adoption-  of- sustainable-  development-  goals-  by- world-  leaders.html . Van den Berghe, K., Bucci Ancapi, F., & van Bueren, E. . When a fire starts  to burn. The relation between an  nationally oriented incinerator capacity  and the port cities’ local circular ambitions. Sustainability, 12 , 4889. Vidal, J. . The solution to the plastic waste crisis? It isn’t recycling. The  Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/  2020/jan/14/plastic-  waste-  crisis-  recycling-  consumption-  environmentally-  frie ndly. World Bank. . What a waste 2.0 . Retrieved from http://datatopics.world- bank.org/what-  a- waste/ .1 INTRODUCTION   15 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7_2CHAPTER 2 Waste Management: A Policy Paradox Abstract  This chapter pr ovides a more in-depth analysis of waste man - agement policy. The prime focus is on countries in the European Union  with some consideration of OECD countries. Of particular interest are  approaches towards recycling waste, with special consideration of plastic  waste. Plastic is particularly toxic in the environment and has become a  ubiquitous problem across the globe. The relevance of the challenges of  governance and leadership in multilevel systems in policy change are also  outlined. The need to shift from voluntary to mandatory approaches is  also outlined as necessary for policy action to establish more sustainable  approaches to waste management. Keywords  Waste management policy • European Union • OECD •  Governance • Leadership • Voluntary approaches • Mandatory  regulations 2.1  Introduct Ion What happens to our waste? In most developed countries, the answer to this  question is largely hidden from view. Citizens place a degree of trust in  organisations, public or private, that collect their household waste each  week to deal with it in an environmentally responsible manner (Jones et al.  2011 ; OECD 2019b ; Nilsson and Harring 2017 ). The idea that waste  16 could end up floating in an ocean to be eaten by an Albatross seems surreal.  Worse still, the idea of waste contributing to the eventual extinction of sea  life would give most of us heartbreak . Yet, the evidence  seems to be that something is terribly wrong with the waste management  systems in developed countries . By contributing to significant  environmental damage waste management policies in developed countries  exhibit the classic conditions of a policy paradox . Since the  early 2000s, as a consequence of environment management policies large  volumes of waste from developed countries have been sent to developing  countries that end up contributing to extreme forms of environmental dam - age . There have been reports of tyres exported from the  UK being burned in Indian waste dumps, electronic waste from Australia  being burned at the Agbogbloshie dump in Africa, and traces of plastic  waste being dumped in the Mariana Trench, 11,000 metres below sea level  . Evidence  like this has strengthened arguments that waste management in developed  countries has been a long-term campaign of toxic colonialism at the expense  of developing countries and the environment . In May 2019, Malaysia’s minister for energy, technology, science, envi - ronment and climate change, Ms Yeo Bee Yin, appeared before a gather - ing of international media at Port Klang. With 60 shipping containers  loaded with waste as her backdrop, she claimed: ‘These containers were  illegally brought into the country under false declaration and other  offences which clearly violates our environmental law’ .  Malaysian officials identified at least 14 origin countries, including the  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development   members like the US, Japan, France, Canada, Australia and Britain. The  minister stated: ‘I am calling out to these countries and other countries  too, we have a problem. We have to solve our own waste problems in our  own backyard. It’s a message we wish to convey internationally’ .  Countries such as Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam and India were making  similar discoveries and passing restrictions prohibiting the importation of  waste being shipped to their countries from developed countries. For  example, Vietnam announced that it would ban the import of scrap mate - rial in early 2019, in response to concerns by residents about worsening  environmental conditions and the health of locals (Nguyen and Roth  2019 ). Most significant of all was the restrictions and stringent bans placed  by China in March 2018. As the world’s largest importer of low-quality  kerbside recycling materials, China’s National Sword policy of import  restrictions on contaminated waste had repercussions across Europe,  S. M. JONES 17 North America and Asia. In echoing the sentiments of these countries,  Yeo Bee Yin stated: “we will do our very best to ensure that Malaysia not  be the plastic rubbish bin of developed countries” . The export of waste from developed to developing countries has been  controversial for more than 30 years. The United Nations Development  Programme  argued in 1989 that it perpetuates inequality and  supports the movement of waste across borders. According to Beylot et al.  , the consumption and production of products (goods and ser - vices) are responsible for adverse effects to the environment, encompass - ing effects on human health and natural resources. Ensuring ‘sustainable  consumption and production’ patterns is goal 12 of the UN Sustainable  Development Goals  , and it has been considered an  overarching objective and an essential requirement for sustainable devel - opment . In the European Union , Sustainable  Consumption and Production  is targeted through a number of  policy instruments, as adopted under the Sustainable Consumption and  Production Action Plan  and the Circular  Economy Action Plan . These are intended  to ‘improve the overall environmental performance of products through - out their life cycle, stimulate demand for better products and production  technologies, and help consumers make informed choices’ (European  Parliament 2020 ). Moreover, in the Seventh Environmental Action  Program  , the EU has a long-term objective of living  well within the planet’s ecological limits, implying a significant decoupling  of environmental impact from economic growth and welfare. As a result of  the current action by developing countries to reject waste, circumstances  have taken on added urgency and the UNDP proposed revising the Basel  Convention, giving the receiving country the right to refuse polluted or  mixed plastic waste that it could not manage safely. In a partial response,  in July 2019, 180 countries agreed to amend the Basel Convention to  make global trade in plastic waste more transparent and better regulated. The actions of governments in China, Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand,  India and Indonesia to stop the importation and processing of contami - nated waste have caused many OECD countries to reconsider their  approaches to waste management. These developments are part of a trend  of questioning the volumes of waste being produced, the nature of the  waste, for example plastics and e-waste, and the volumes of waste being  recycled and/or placed in landfill . Contemporary  methods have relied on exporting waste as a means of managing 2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   18 expanding volumes of municipal waste and meeting international obliga - tions to recycle waste. The countries having waste returned from Malaysia  have been forced to deal with the need to establish new approaches to  waste management that could have long-term economic and environmen - tal consequences. 2.2  Waste as PolIcy Issue The OECD defines municipal waste as the waste collected by, or on behalf  of, municipalities and includes ‘household waste originating from house - holds  and similar  waste from small commercial activities, office buildings, institutions such  as schools and government buildings, and small businesses that treat or  dispose of waste at the same facilities used for municipally collected waste’  . According to OECD data, during the 1990s municipal  waste increased  mostly in line with private consumption expendi - ture  and GDP . Currently, the quantity of municipal waste  generated exceeds an estimated 650 million tonnes. A person living in an  OECD country generates on average 520 kg of waste per year; see Fig.  2.1.  Countries such as Denmark , the US  and Australia   are at the high end of the scale. Others, such as Japan   and South Korea , represent lower levels of consumption. The  amount and composition of municipal waste vary widely, being related to  levels and patterns of consumption, the rate of urbanisation, lifestyles, and  national and local waste management practices. On average, Europeans  0100200300400500600700800kg/capitaMunicipa l wast e per capita Of which:  Househol d wast e Estonia Poland Slovak Republic Czech RepublicIcelandJapan KoreaMexicoHungaryChileCanada TurkeySloveniaPortugal BelgiumSpainSwedenItaly Finland United KingdomNorway Greece NetherlandsFranceAustria IrelandIsrael Germany New ZealandAustralia Luxembourg SwitzerlandUnited StatesDenmark OECD Asia-OceaniaOECD EuropeOECD OECD America Fig. 2.1  Municipal waste generation intensities per capita  S. M. JONES 19 generate around 130  kg less than people living in North America but  80 kg more than people living in the OECD Asia-Oceania region. According to OECD, research business as usual will increase the envi - ronmental impacts that are associated with harvesting resources, process - ing and using them, and disposing of the resulting waste (OECD 2017 ,  7). Areas of particular concern from this linear approach include the local  environmental damages and greenhouse gas  emissions associated  with material extraction and processing . IPCC  reports show that emissions from the waste sector are among the largest  sources of non-CO 2 GHG emissions . Current methods of  waste management, primarily landfill, produce climate-related CH 4 emis - sions. The mitigation of these emissions would make an important contri - bution to reduce global warming . Developed  countries play an important role in this scenario, but significant changes to  current waste management policies in many countries will be required. Municipal waste has traditionally been viewed as a management issue  dealt with by technical experts using different models that apply methods  and tools such a risk assessment, cost benefit analysis and life cycle analysis  as part of the decision-making process. The goals of these models have  varied from the simple, optimising the routes of vehicles transporting  waste, to complex objectives such as life cycle analysis of products  . In the 1970s, models focused on examina - tion of a specific problem of waste disposal such as transfer station siting.  Landfill was the dominant processing option and recycling was rarely  taken into account. Landfill strategy undertaken by engineers and plan - ners was given precedence over the ‘political and social concerns of elected  representatives and community organisations’, often resulting in friction  between experts, the local community and the local politicians (Morrissey  and Brown 2004 , 304). Such approaches were unsuitable for long-term  planning. Approaches taken in the 1980s extended the focus to examine  the relationships between each factor in a waste management system. Cost  minimisation was a key objective and recycling and behaviour change also  entered the approaches encouraged by some researchers (Englehardt  1990 ). The minimisation of the waste generated was yet to be seen as a  worthy concern in the debates concerned with the waste generated by  households. This was to change soon as green groups and anti-consumer - ist activists began raising the negative environmental consequences of the  accumulation of waste .2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   20 During the 1990s, waste policy shifted from a reliance on landfill to a  more integrated approach that considered a broad range of waste streams  and preferred management practices based on site-specific environmental  and economic considerations. Whole of life cycle of products was pro - moted as part of a full assessment of the systems of environmental impact  . Facing increasing public demand for more  sustainable practices, many European countries banned landfill and  focused on identifying alternative forms of waste disposal and to moder - nise waste management. The following three reasons were most often  cited for waste being a policy problem: waste disposal can harm the envi - ronment and human health; space for landfills was becoming scarce as  community opinion moved against them; and waste is the end product of  a life cycle process that can have upstream environmental and resource  depletion implications. There was also the underlying moral view of waste  generation, arguing that it is symptomatic of wasteful and undesirable  overconsumption . By the early 2000s, researchers argued the focus on economic and envi - ronmental aspects of previous decades needed to change if sustainable  management practices were to be implemented. For a waste management  system to be sustainable, it should be seen as integral component of social  and ecological systems. In this regard, it needed to be environmentally  effective, economically affordable and socially acceptable. Evidence was  emerging that waste management programmes that ignored the social  aspects was ‘doomed to failure’ . Petts  argued  that ‘the most effective management of waste needed to relate to local  environmental, economic and social priorities’ . Waste management  programmes and policies began taking social aspects into account, and  indicators for sustainable waste management were developed. Social  aspects included the problems of communication, public acceptance,  , public participation in planning and  implementation, consumer behaviour, intergenerational factors and  changing value systems . Largely as a result of these developments, contemporary waste manage - ment is typically based around the notion of sustainability through the  concept of a waste hierarchy. This approach sees waste avoidance as prefer - able to reuse, reuse to recycling. Disposal, particularly to landfill, and  incineration are seen to be the least desirable options given the space  required, pollution generated and the missed opportunities of reusing  valuable resources. In compliance with this approach, many jurisdictions  S. M. JONES 21 have set targets for diverting waste, some going so far as to aim for zero  waste to landfill . Different OECD countries adopt their  preferred methods of waste management, with varying degrees of landfill  and recycling rates; see Fig.  2.2. Waste policy is now likely to support  managerial strategies and waste treatment technologies that seek to main - tain environmental quality and to meet sustainability goals. Policies allow  both waste management industries and government agencies to meet  common needs of waste management with the greatest environmental  potential, to recycle materials out of waste streams, to enlarge the renew - able energy supply, to seek for more socially acceptable options and to  preserve biodiversity and natural ecosystems simultaneously. According to  the UN Environment Programme , achieving these goals requires  all technical and non-technical aspects of a waste management system to  be analyzed as a whole, since they are ‘inter-related with one another and  developments in one area frequently affect practices or activities in another  area’ . The crisis in waste management has raised attention to some of the  pitfalls of current approaches to waste management. Cities in OECD  countries are among the largest waste generators, producing around 1.75  million tonnes per day. According to the ‘peak waste’ argument, the vol - ume of waste is expected to increase in OECD countries until 2050, owing  to urban population growth . The magnitude of  Landfill 100% 80% 60% 40% 20% 0% Municipal waste: household and similar waste collected by or for municipalities, orginating mainly from households and smaill b usinesses. Includes bulky waste and separate collection. CZE: 2016 data. OECD , “Municipal waste generation and treatment”, OECD Environment Statistics  .a) Source:n.a NZLCHEDEUSWEBELDNKJPNNLDAUTNORESTFINKORLUXGBRSVNFRAITAIRLPOLAUSPRTCZEUSAHUNESPISLLVASVKCANISRGRCMEXTURCHLIncineration without energy recover yI ncineration with energy recover yR ecycling and composting Other treatment Fig. 2.2  Municipal waste management, by type of tr eatment, 20152 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   22 waste production rates in cities varies depending on the level of infrastruc - ture development and individual consumption, waste production rates in  cities are often far higher than per-capita global averages (Kennedy et al.  2015 ). Increasing population in many countries and accelerated urbanisa - tion, particularly in lower- and lower-middle income nations, are expected  to increase global waste production for several decades (Hoornweg et al.  2015 ). ‘Business-as-usual’ projections show that, by 2100, solid-waste  generation rates will exceed 11 million tonnes per day—more than three  times current rates . In 2016, the total waste generated in the  EU-28 by all economic activities and households amounted to 2.538 mil - lion tonnes; this was the highest amount recorded for the EU-28 during  the period 2004–2016 . Research suggests that in multilevel  systems effective management of waste will require cooperative and coor - dinated governance arrangements between governments. This is particu - larly the case in the EU where municipal waste is no longer the province  of relatively autonomous municipalities concerned with collection and  disposal of waste, and is now ‘a complex process in which a range of inter - national institutions, national, regional and local government agencies and  non-state actors have a degree of influence and responsibility’ (Bulkeley  et al. 2005 ). The management of waste has been at the centre of objectives includ - ing protecting human health and the environment, economic develop - ment and the fulfilment of social and regulatory stipulations (Soltani et al.  2015 , 319). The complexity of decision-making in this policy area is high - lighted by the need to consider multiple, and often contradictory, criteria  (e.g. environmental impacts like global warming, human health risks,  resource depletion and damage to ecosystems), economic costs and ben - efits, contextual issues (such as waste type and rate of generation, political  and social factors), and international obligations that establish govern - ment commitments to change (Giusti 2009 ; Pires et  al. 2011 ; Soltani  et al. 2015 ; de Souza Melare et al. 2017 ). Other issues include failure to  effectively deal with the challenges of data collection and facilitate experi - mentation, learning and change . The  current crisis has focused the attention of governments on developing an  effective policy response. One particular area of concern is the prolifera - tion of plastic in the waste stream. The next section highlights the chal - lenges for policymakers in implementing policies that consider the  complexities of both consumption and disposal of material that continues  to be the source of a serious environmental problem. S. M. JONES 23 2.3  Plast Ic Waste: a symbol Ic case Some of the most evocative symbols of the current state of waste manage - ment are the floating platforms, or ‘plastic gyres’ in the Indian and Pacific  oceans. The case of plastic waste encapsulates many of the arguments  around policy issues of the current waste management crisis and the pos - sible solutions to the associated problems. Estimates show that the global  production of plastic has increased from 2 million metric tons  in  1950 to 400 million Mt. in 2015; see Fig.  2.3 . By the  end of 2015, 8300 million Mt of virgin plastic had been produced, roughly  two-thirds of which has been released into the environment and remains  there in some form—as debris in the oceans, as micro- or nanoparticles in  the air and agricultural soils, as microfibers in water supplies, or as mic - roparticles in the human body. Figure  2.3 shows that by 2015, of the  approximately 6300 Mt of plastic waste generated, around 9% had been  recycled, 12% incinerated and 79% accumulated in landfills or the natural  environment . A report released by the Centre for Environmental Law  in  2019  raised attention to the ongoing hidden environmental costs of plas - tic and the failure of current waste management practices to deal with  400 Other Textiles Industrial Machinery Consumer & Institutional Products Electrical/Electronic Building & Construction Transportation Packaging350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015Primary Plastic Production  Fig. 2.3  Global Plastic Pr oduction 1950–2015 2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   24 these costs . Key points from the report focus on the produc - tion of waste, the disposal of waste and the potential solutions to the  problems caused by the waste management process. OECD   reports highlight two key environmental impacts from plastic. First, tradi - tional plastics production is highly energy-intensive, and was estimated to  account for 400 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions (around 1%  of the global total) in 2012. The fossil fuel feedstock used in plastics pro - duction also accounts for 4–8% of global oil and gas production. Further,  carbon dioxide as well as other greenhouse gases are emitted when plastic  is incinerated. Second, the proliferation of plastics use, in combination  with poor end-of-life waste management, has resulted in widespread, per - sistent plastics pollution. Modelling suggests that around 10% of global  plastics waste generation  was mismanaged in 2010. Plastic  pollution is present in all the world’s major ocean basins, including remote  islands, the poles and the deep seas, and an additional 5 to 13 million  tonnes are introduced every year . Developed coun - tries, faced with the problem of too much plastic waste, too little capacity  to recycle and a lack of demand for recycled plastic, have exported the  problem to poorer countries as a key strategy to deal with domestic post-   consumer waste . There is no mechanism for source  countries to be held accountable for the impacts of plastic waste exported  for recycling to other countries, particularly to countries less able to man - age waste. Searching for possible solutions to the problems created by plastic  waste has focused on recycling and disposal elements of waste manage - ment processes. Recycling has proven to be disappointing as evidenced by  the failure in many OECD countries to develop substantial recycling  industries. In countries such as the UK there have been incentives to  export plastic waste rather than develop domestic recycling industries. The  Australian prime minister described the situation his country: ‘We are not  recycling plastics in this country, it’s going into landfill or it’s going into  boats and being sent up to Asia and ends up washing out of rivers and  creating islands of plastic off the coast of the United States, where it drifts  to, which is three times the size of France’ . Recent reports  from the UK National Audit Office highlight the key issues: The system provides a financial incentive for reprocessors and exporters to  increase packaging recycling rates to meet EU targets, and makes obligated  companies responsible for contributing to the costs of recycling the packag - S. M. JONES 25 ing they put on the market. The regulations do not place a direct require - ment on obligated companies to collect and recycle their own packaging.  Instead, they allow for packaging to be collected as part of the normal man - agement of waste in the UK, both by local authorities and commercial col - lectors, before being sorted and sold for recycling or disposed of through  landfill or incineration. The regulations then allow accredited reprocessors  and exporters to issue recovery notes for the amount of packaging they have  recycled and to sell these notes to obligated companies.  Some European countries are leading the way in many respects with  some having developed a model that attempts to manage plastic waste and  reduce marine pollution. There is increasing recognition that recycling  alone will not solve the plastic waste problem. Arguments for greater stew - ardship stress that companies need to take responsibility for the plastics  they produce by making them recyclable and by reducing the volumes of  production. Programmes are based on the principle of extended producer  responsibility , first outlined in Sweden in 1990 .  The central idea is that EPR strengthens stewardship by shifting financial  responsibility for end-of-life disposal to product manufacturers, providing  an incentive for improved product design, reuse and recycling (Tibbetts  2015 ). In these schemes, producers pay the costs of tracking, managing  and recycling or disposing of packaging after their products have been  used. Examples such as the UK case suggest that waste management pol - icy must also support a stronger stimulation of public responsibility  towards plastic consumption . Legislation  requires manufacturers to recover their packaging after product consump - tion. Scholars liken the situation to addressing air pollution, where people  have long realised that filtering the air is not a long-term solution. Filtering  the oceans seems similarly implausible . Eriksen et  al.   argue for comprehensive approaches that involves going to the  source by reducing the use of plastic, improving waste management and  recycling the materials to stop them from reaching the environment. In 2019, G20 governments met in Tokyo and agreed to a set of volun - tary actions to promote a comprehensive life cycle approach to urgently  and effectively prevent and reduce plastic litter discharge to the oceans.  Using measures, ‘including environmentally sound waste management,  environmentally sound clean-up of marine plastic litter, deployment of  innovative solutions, and international cooperation to enhance national  capacities, as well as prevention and reduction of plastic waste generation 2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   26 and littering, promotion of sustainable consumption and production,  including but not limited to promoting resource efficiency, circular econ - omy, sustainable materials management, waste to value approach, and  measures to address sea-based sources’ . The world is yet to  see whether international voluntary agreements such as this by the G20  can be effective in making a serious impact on the volumes of plastic waste  currently impacting on the environment. 2.4  Governance  and leadersh IP Within the multilevel context, municipal governments are playing an  increasingly important role in policy innovation towards improving sus - tainability. Satterthwaite  argues that many of the processes implicit  in urbanisation can have a positive overall effect as urban residents can  generate a substantially smaller volume of GHG emissions than residents  elsewhere in the same country. Well-planned and governed cities provide  the potential for ‘de-linking high quality of life from high levels of con - sumption’, which is the critical factor leading to reducing the environmen - tal impact of waste . The argument includes the  potential of city governments to establish sustainable waste management  processes that apply the principles of the waste management hierarchy   through education programmes to reduce waste,  establishing recycling industries and avoiding landfill. Addressing urban  waste involves complex arrangements involving citizens and industry par - ticipation and consists of technologies, regulations, public services and  user practices. Bugge et al. argue that the ‘process represents dealing with  “path-dependent”, interwoven and institutionalised sociotechnical  regimes that can be hard to change. A transition to more sustainable waste  management practices will require a fundamental shift of social and insti - tutional components and the re-design of the physical infrastructure sys - tem’ . Consideration must be given to urban governance arrangements as  they impact on the capacity for policy change and innovation. Hartley   argues that we should consider innovations, particularly radical  or complex ones, to be multidimensional. She described three competing  paradigms of governance and public management, ‘traditional’ public  administration and ‘New Public Management’ , and ‘networked  governance’, which may be conducive to particular ways in which innova - tion is both generated and adopted. Bugge et  al.  argue that  S. M. JONES 27 different governance regimes affect innovation dynamics in urban waste  systems in different and challenging ways. For them the ‘traditional’ model  constitutes an organisation where the municipality controls and carries out  most of the waste-related activities inhouse. NPM implies a system of gov - ernance where the municipality outsources several waste-related activities  to private companies by issuing highly specified public tenders. A net - worked model of governance implies an organisation where the munici - pality facilitates and orchestrates interaction and synergies across the actors  involved in the collection and processing of organic waste from both the  public and the private sector. Each of these models has strengths and  weaknesses and may co-exist in bringing about change. In terms of waste  management, however, the limitation of governance is that its focus tends  to be on system optimisation rather than system change (Bugge et  al.  2019 ). There is not one best governance regime, but a need to acknowl - edge their co-  existence and car efully consider the characteristics implica - tions of the different regimes in order to arrange for long-term dynamic  and sustainable cities and regions. Like other wicked policy problems in multilevel systems, waste requires  joint action between governments and relevant stakeholders, including  civil society, epistemic communities and business groups .  Improvements to waste management cannot rely on local governments  alone. Clearly local authorities are principal players, but their limited  resources, flexibility and authority undermine their capacity to enable sus - tainable waste management . Approaches that  require stewardship responsibilities by producers will need policy support  from other levels of government that hold the appropriate policy levers.  The development of consistent approaches across jurisdictions will also  require national policies to establish minimum standards, indicating that  multilevel government is a key mode in the governing of municipal waste  . Business also has a role to play in terms of participa - tion and commitment to sustainable approaches that reflect government  policy commitments. Waste policy action towards sustainability requires political leaders mobil - ising official institutions and wider political systems into providing  resources and enacting regulatory interventions commensurate with  social, economic and environmental challenges. Borraz and John ( 2004 ,  112) argue that ‘leadership is crucial to the functioning and success of  local governance’. The politics of decentralisation, networks, participa - tion, partnerships, bureaucratic reform, rapid policy change and central 2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   28 Multilevel Complexity for Improving Recycling in Australia: Working  with Stakeholders in Victoria in 2020 Infrastructure Victoria’s  Elissa McNamara explains how Victoria could recover  up to 90 per cent of its waste if $1 billion is spent on recycling infrastructure in the next  two decades. National Goals for consistency National packaging targets can be met if Victoria can transform its resource and  recycling sector. It is very important to be consistent and focus on both state and  national approaches. Investment in improved data will also be needed. Every  Australian state and territory will have its own challenges across the next decade, but  McNamara says interstate colleagues are willing to share learnings and contribute to  the national waste action policy. She notes that there is national focus on boosting  landfill levy consistency and examining how consistent approaches could be  economically viable for infrastructure investments. McNamara says collaboration is  essential to providing a consistent service across Victoria Stakeholder interest In May 2020 IV released its report, which recommended upgrading or building 87  new processing facilities for six priority materials: plastics, paper and cardboard, glass,  organics, tyres and e-waste, to achieve a 90 per cent recovery target over the next two  decades. “We’ve certainly had no shortage of interest from local governments,  industry stakeholders and the private sector, who are responsible for building a  stronger and more sustainable recycling and resource recovery industry for Victoria,”  McNamara says. More than 1500 stakeholders have attended various briefings and  webinars held by IV in the past three months to discuss its infrastructure advice.  Importantly, McNamara says there has also been strong interest from investment  funds and market analysts looking to identify development opportunities in the sector. .Industry Collaboration  According to Rose Read, National Waste and Recycling Industry Council   CEO, IV’s report and advice is comprehensive, but it comes very much from an  infrastructure lens. “Simply building better collection systems to clean up inputs and  more processing infrastructure will not increase recovery rates. You also need to build  markets at the same time to match demand with supply,” she says. While NWRIC  supports all of IV’s recommendations, Read says focus must be placed on strengthening  markets for priority materials, cleaner inputs, greater recovery of energy from non-   recyclable waste and better planning by strengthening the status of, and processes  around, Victoria’s Recycling Infrastructure Plan. “This will fix many of the major  systemic problems Victoria currently has, but to really drive and create a circular  economy, it must look at waste as more than an essential service but also as an  important resource industry,” Read says. McNamara stresses the opportunity for the  private and public sector to collaborate in ways they haven’t before, to develop cost- effective infrastructure and facilitate a stronger waste and recovery market in Victoria.  “Our work shows there is not one single approach to achieve these outcomes, all  levels of government, business and households will need to work together if we are to  realise the huge opportunity before us,” IV stated in the report.  S. M. JONES 29 intervention need powerful but creative leadership figures to give a direc - tion to local policymaking. A political priority for change needs to be  established to move away from current approaches and to help ensure  more sustainable approaches. Examining how governments place political  priority on establishing sustainable waste management systems will be  important for this transition. Effective, equitable and sustainable responses  will require a strong role for government .  Recognising the complex multidimensional nature of waste as a policy  issue that an empowered coordinating policy approaches in multilevel sys - tems is more likely to ensure stronger direction and reflexivity towards  system change. 2.5  shIftInG from  voluntary   to mandatory  aPProaches Since the 1990s, voluntary initiatives have been an important element in  the mix of public policies and corporate strategies for managing industrial  impacts on the environment . Since Keohler  revealed  that voluntary environmental programmes did not generate significant  pollution abatement, there has been further research supporting the defi - ciencies of voluntary approaches to environment-related policies. Borck  and Coglianese  argued that if environmental problems are truly  externalities, it is not obvious that the average environmental benefits per  participant from a voluntary programme will be as high as the average  environmental benefits per regulated entity from mandatory regulations.  Nevertheless, the risk of significant civil and criminal penalties probably  can motivate action in a way that a certificate of recognition from a volun - tary arrangement cannot. Morgenstern and Pizer  found it hard to  argue for voluntary programmes where there is a clear desire for major  changes in behaviour. The OECD argues that ‘the performance of many  voluntary approaches would be improved if there were a real threat of  other instruments being used if  targets are not met’  . For policymakers there is an ongoing question of a bal - ance between voluntary and regulatory requirements to produce environ - mental outcomes . Recent evidence is  more conclusive as Coglianese and Nash  argued that although  governments and policy advocates sometimes urge voluntary programmes  as a substitute for conventional government regulation, it appears that the 2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   30 most effective voluntary programmes depend on a robust backdrop of  community pressure and regulatory threats. In attempts to promote change, many governments in OECD coun - tries have chosen voluntary approaches that focus on providing informa - tion, subsidies and incentives to respond to complex environmental  issues, including waste policy . This may be a contribut - ing factor to the considerable differences in performance between coun - tries in the effectiveness of their policies to promote recycling, the  volumes of waste going to landfill and the use of incinerators (OECD  2017 ). This has particularly been the case in many countries in the  European Union where waste prevention plans have been the preferred  method of complying with the EU 2008 waste directive. Countries  adopting strong regulations as their approach to improve the effective - ness of waste management, including prevention, perform better than  countries that choose largely voluntary campaigns (Castillo-Gimenez  et al. 2019 : Johansson and Corvellec 2018 ). Governments that have the  highest rates of effective recycling tend to take stronger action through  the application of institutional and regulatory measures such as the appli - cation of taxes and levies to waste disposal, the banning of landfill and the  introduction of legislated stewardship obligations for packaging manu - facturers . Research highlights the ineffectiveness of many voluntary measures in  environment policy due to ‘weak program design and poor fit with the  institutional context’ . Similarly, a reli - ance on market-based approaches has contributed to a crisis of recycling in  many OECD countries following introduction in 2018 of the China  Sword Policy. For countries such as the UK, the US, Australia and Canada,  the failure of their recycling programmes required a ‘nationwide reckon - ing’ of current approaches .  Evidence suggests that jurisdictions with ineffective voluntary measures  that recognise the need to take stronger policy action shift to law and  regulation to reinforce measures such as product life cycle stewardship,  processing charges and fines, as well as other complementary measures  . Voluntary measures tend to work more effectively  when backed by strong regulatory and enforcement infrastructure, con - sisting of legal requirements such as authorisations/licenses/permits or  standards . Deciding to undertake stronger measures  requires policymakers to establish political priority for policy change away  from incremental proposals to more radical measures that help to  S. M. JONES 31 transform current unsustainable practices. For this to occur, however,  there needs to be a commitment to change, as regulation is regarded as a  challenging undertaking most governments prefer to avoid (Riding  et al. 2015 ). Weak legislative threats primarily result from the political difficulty of  establishing stringent mandatory regulations. Governments implement  voluntary measures due to the fear of weak mandatory regulations even  though participation rates were low. In addition to political difficulty, it is  possible that governments prefer a voluntary approach with a high abate - ment rate and low participation rate to one with a low abatement rate and  high participation rate because the former generates greater social welfare  than the latter . In other words, getting voluntary agree - ment from a small number of large manufacturers may be more manage - able than to attempt to promote comprehensive change. Because  participation is not mandatory, there is a trade-off between the participa - tion rate and the abatement rates of individual participating firms. The  weak legislative threat particularly results from a legislative mandatory  standard in which powerful self-interest groups use political pressure to  maintain their positions. In addition to the introduction of stronger regulations, the OECD   argues that whole of government approaches should also be regu - lated if effectiveness is to be achieved. In recent decades, policy coordina - tion to support greater policy coherence in multilevel systems has become  particularly relevant in many OECD and non-OECD countries, mainly  due to the emergence of cross-cutting, multidimensional policy challenges  and the subsequent atomisation of administrative structures. It is critical  for policy effectiveness to regulate for coherence and improve policy coor - dination in the way governments work across ministries, agencies and  other administrative units. Governments need to strengthen the institu - tional and financial capacities of their centres of government. For the  coordination of waste policy, both vertical and horizontal, within and  between jurisdictions in multilevel systems, needs to be a political priority.  The policy change literature on environmental policy shows how govern - ments have been reluctant to act, particularly in the integration of new  policy initiatives across jurisdictions . In many  jurisdictions, environment policy resides primarily with the subnational  and municipal governments. According to Dovers , environmental  issues are often handled as a matter of convenience and tractability. Some  OECD member countries such as Sweden and the UK have strong 2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   32 traditions and structures of integrated environment policymaking (Jordan  and Lenschow 2010 ). The UK’s coordination system (see Russel and  Jordan 2009 ) commits all the constituent parts of the national govern - ment to meet commonly agreed objectives. In Sweden, sector responsibil - ity has been the central policy principle that, coupled with a public  management style that prefers clearly specified objectives (at the national  and, partly, the sectoral level), facilitates integration (Jordan and  Lenschow 2010 ). Neoliberal approaches that stress strong linkages between government  and industry have helped to ensure that powerful industry representatives  are placed in positions that directly and indirectly influence the policy  decisions that will impact on environmental requirements. New gover - nance arrangements have attempted to establish greater flexibility towards  regulation with more innovative forms of control on the principles of  responsive regulation that assume that most enterprises respond to ‘light  touch’ directives. Methods include self-regulation and coregulation that  may involve commercial interests participating directly with government  agencies in designing mechanisms promoting environmental improve - ments and sanctioning failures. Arrangements can establish non-   gover nment agencies that act as controlling and monitoring authorities  that operate in the ‘shadow’ of government. For example, the Australian  Packaging Corporation administers the Australian Packaging Covenant  as  a voluntary agreement between some of the larger packaging manufactur - ers and government since 1999 to improve rates of recycling for plastic  packaging . A fundamental challenge of such governance  arrangements is how to orchestrate the many possible approaches and  relationships available on the legal, regulatory and governance spectrums  . Research on good policy practice outlines the fundamentals that need  to be observed in the policy process: these include clarity of goals, consid - eration of evidence, rigorous policy design, stakeholder engagement,  comprehensive appraisal of options, clarity of the role for government  including accountabilities, and the establishment of review and evaluation  mechanisms . The achievement of the UN  2030 Sustainable Development Goals  will require whole-of-gov - ernment approaches and strengthened institutional coordination and  coherence at all levels of policymaking. This will contribute to ensuring  more integrated policy frameworks for sustainable development; promote  synergies between economic, social and environmental policies; identify  S. M. JONES 33 trade-offs; and consider transboundary and intergenerational impacts. For  Nilsson and Harring , the identification of synergy and conflict is at  three levels: policy objectives, policy instruments and implementation  practices, also considering as far as possible outcome and impacts. Without  these critical elements, developing and implementing circular economy  objectives on waste will be challenging. In order to ensure that these  aspects are incorporated into circular economy policies, political priority  will be critical. 2.6  conclus Ion Waste is increasingly seen as a resource that needs to be reused, a business  opportunity rather than an unsustainable environmental cost. How devel - oped countries transition from the current paradoxical approaches to less  wasteful, less environmentally damaging and more sustainable practices has  become a new challenge that requires urgent attention by governments.  Popular solutions focus on moving from the linear economy (take, make  and throw away) to circular approaches that promote the reduction of con - sumption and the recycling and reuse of products, reducing waste and  maximising the use of resources. How developed countries transition to  sustainable approaches has become a key question of governments in terms  of waste policy. In its purest form sustainability progressively eliminates  waste by keeping resources in continual use. Such an approach is a dramatic  shift and requires the complete transition from well-entrenched linear  approaches that have been the foundations for market-based economies. If stronger regulatory approaches are required in conjunction with tra - ditional voluntary measures, then an important first step requires govern - ments to make policy change a political priority. The policy change  literature provides some insights on what is required for a policy issue to  take priority on a government’s agenda. For complex and challenging  issues political attention alone will be insufficient to ensure political action  . Issues need to have political priority before govern - ments commit institutional resources to enacting regulatory interventions  . A framework influenced by multiple policy  change theories will help reveal a range of dimensions and their determi - nants that potentially influence and shape political priority. The framework  proposed in this book consists of four interrelated dimensions: political  context, power of actors, the influence of ideas and issue characteristics.  Kay and Baker  argue that the theoretical pluralism of a such a 2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   34 framework allows researchers to consider multiple variables and to elabo - rate on relationships. The book does not intend to establish direct causa - tion for policy change but it will outline useful and plausible results  without causal inferences. As we approach the target date for the UN Sustainable Development  Goals in 2030, what happens to our waste over the next decade is a critical  question for government policymakers. Current evidence suggests that we  need to prioritise more sustainable approaches over business as usual prac - tices. Governments signing on to the Paris Climate Agreement are required  to develop their own contributions to mitigate against increasing GHG  emissions. These Nationally Determined Contributions  can  include specifics of waste sector mitigation actions that show how indi - vidual countries will manage waste in the future .  Examinations of these commitments reveal that of the 174 signatories to  the Paris agreement only 67 cite at least one specific waste sector mitiga - tion commitment . The focus of these actions is largely directed  towards improving landfilling and waste processing through incineration  . This information is somewhat troubling as it shows that less than  50% of signatories intend to take any action to change waste management  policy. Also troubling is the assumption inherent in any actions or inac - tions that governments signing the Paris Agreement seem to have little to  no intention of attempting to reduce volumes of waste or shifting from  business as usual linear approaches in their economies. Recommendations for a shift away from linear to circular approaches to  waste management are increasingly popular with government and business  throughout OECD countries. OECD reports support the transition to  circular approaches as a means of putting ‘resources back into environ - mental and economic systems and reducing material losses through reus - ing and preventing waste’ . As such, the core idea  behind the circular economy is not new. There is significant overlap with  concepts such as industrial ecology, the waste hierarchy, zero waste and  cradle-to-cradle design, which have been debated for decades (Benn and  Giurco 2014 ). Establishing a circular economy will require strong political  commitment as it requires significant transitions away from existing busi - ness models that rely on the linear approach including the production of  waste. Such transitions will seem counterintuitive to business that rely on  these approaches for their profitability. Hood  argues that  conspicuous consumerism was encouraged at the turn of the twentieth  century to redress the imbalance between overproduction and demand,  S. M. JONES 35 and that circular policies must now encourage conspicuous non-   consumption and reuse as the new signifiers of self-worth. The next chap - ter will outline the essential elements of the circular approach and its  relevance to establishing sustainable waste management. references Australian Packaging Covenant . 2021. About us: Our history . Online:  https://apco.associationonline.com.au/who-we-are/our-history Baker, P., Gill, T., Friel, S., Carey, G., & Kay, A. . Generating political prior - ity for regulatory interventions targeting obesity prevention: An Australian case  study. Social Science & Medicine, 177 , 141–149. Benn, S., & Giurco, D. . Explainer: What is the circular economy? The  Conversation . Retrieved from https://theconversation.com/explainer-  what-  is-  the- circular-  economy-  23298 . Beylot, A., Secchi, M., Cerutti, A., Merciai, S., Schmidt, J., & Sala, S. .  Assessing the environmental impacts of EU consumption at macro-scale.  Journal of Cleaner Production, 216 , 382–393. Borck, J.  C., & Coglianese, C. . Voluntary environmental programs:  Assessing their effectiveness. Annual Review of Environment and Resources,  34, 305–324. Borraz, O., & John, P. . The transformation of urban political leadership in  Western Europe. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research,  28, 107–120. Bugge, M. M., Fevolden, A. M., & Klitkou, A. . Governance for system  optimization and system change: The case of urban waste. Research Policy,  48, 1076–1090. Bulkeley, H., Watson, M., Hudson, R., & Weaver, P. . Governing municipal  waste: Towards a new analytical framework. Journal of Environmental Policy  and Planning, 7 , 1–23. Castillo-Giménez, J., Montañés, A., & Picazo-Tadeo, A. J. . Performance  and convergence in municipal waste treatment in the European Union. Waste  Management, 85 , 222–231. Centre for Environmental Law . 2019. Plastic & Climate: The hidden costs  of a plastic planet . Online: https://www.ciel.org/reports/plastic-health-   the-hidden-costs-of-a-plastic-planetmay-2019/ Clapp, J. . Toxic exports: The transfer of hazardous wastes from rich to poor  countries . Cornell University Press. Coglianese, C., & Nash, J. . Motivating without mandates: The role of  voluntary programs in environmental governance. In L. Paddock, R. Glicksman,  & N. S. Bryner , Decision making in environmental law   Elgar.2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   36 Coles, B. . Recovering 90 per cent of Victoria’s waste. Waste Management  Review . Retrieved from https://wastemanagementreview.com.au/recovering- 90-per-cent-of-victorias-waste/ . Cookson, C. and Hook, L. . Millions of pieces of plastic waste found on  remote island chain. Financial Times: Online. https://www.ft.com/content/   42008d46-76e7-11e9-be7d6d846537acab Corkey, M. . As costs skyrocket, more US cities stop recycling. New York  Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/16/business/ local-  recycling-  costs.html . Cressey, D. . The plastic ocean. Nature, 536 , 263–265. de Souza Melaré, A.  V., González, S.  M., Faceli, K., & Casadei, V. .  Technologies and decision support systems to aid solid-waste management: A  systematic review. Waste Management, 59 , 567–584. Dovers, S. . The Australian environmental policy agenda. Australian  Journal of Public Administration, 72 , 114–128. Englehardt, J. D. . Economic analysis of recycling for small municipal waste  collectors. Journal of Resource Management and Technology, 18 , 84–96. Entwistle, T. . Towards sustainable waste management: Central steering,  local enabling or autopoiesis? Policy and Politics, 27 , 375–388. Eriksen, M., Lebreton, L. C., Carson, H. S., Thiel, M., Moore, C. J., Borerro,  J. C., Galgani, F., Ryan, P. G., & Reisser, J. . Plastic pollution in the  world’s oceans: More than 5 trillion plastic pieces weighing over 250,000 tons  afloat at sea. PLoS One, 9 , e111913. European Commission.. Sustainable Consumption and Production and  Sustainable Industrial Policy Action Plan . Online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/ legal-content/EN/TXT/?  uri=CELEX:52008DC0397. European Commission. . Action plan for the Circular Economy . Online:  https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELE X:52015DC0614 European Commission. . Better regulation guidelines and toolbox .  Luxembourg: Publications Office of the EU. European Parliament. . Fact Sheet: Sustainable Consumption and Production .  Online: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/77/sustainable-   consumption-and-production European Union . . DECISION No 1386/2013/EU OF THE  EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL : Online: https:// eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?  uri=CELEX:32013D1386. European Union . . Eurostat: Waste statistics . Retrieved from https:// ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-  explained/index.php/Waste_statistics . G20. . G20 implementation framework for actions on marine plastic litter .  Retrieved from https://www.g20karuizawa.go.jp/assets/pdf/G20%20 Implementation%20Framework%20for%20Actions%20on%20Marine%20 Plastic%20Litter.pdf . S. M. JONES 37 Geyer, R. . Production, use, and fate of synthetic polymers. In Plastic Waste  and Recycling  . Academic Press. Geyer, R., Jambeck, J., & Law, K. . Production, use, and fate of all plastics  ever made. Science Advances, 3/7 . https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782 . Giusti, L. . A review of waste management practices and their impact on  human health. Waste Management, 29 , 2227–2239. Global PSC. . International Stewardship Forum , Sydney, Australia.  June. Online: http://www.globalpsc.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/ GlobalPSC_  Intl_Stewardship_Forum_Issues_Paper_0618.pdf. Gunningham, N., & Holley, C. . Next-generation environmental regula - tion: Law, regulation, and governance. Annual Review of Law and Social  Science, 12 , 273–293. Hartley, J. . Innovation in governance and public services: Past and present.  Public money and management, 25 , 27–34. Head, B.  W. . Evidence, uncertainty, and wicked problems in climate  change decision making in Australia. Environment and Planning C: Government  and Policy, 32 , 663–679. Hood, B. . Make recycled goods covetable. Nature News,  531, 438–440. Hoornweg, D., Bhada-Tata, P., & Kennedy, C. . Environment: Waste pro - duction must peak this century. Nature News, 502 , 615. Hoornweg, D., Bhada-Tata, P., & Kennedy, C. . Peak waste: When is it  likely to occur? Journal of Industrial Ecology, 19 , 117–128. Howard, M. C. . Asia’s environmental crisis . Routledge. IPCC. . Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Contribution of  working group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United  Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. Jarvis, C., & Robinson, M. . Canada’s recycling industry is on life-support.  Here’s how to fix it. Global News . Retrieved from https://globalnews.ca/ news/5207352/how-  to- fix- canadas-  recycling-  industry/ . Johansson, N., & Corvellec, H. . Waste policies gone soft: An analysis of  European and Swedish waste prevention plans. Waste Management,  77, 322–332. Jon T. Powell, Marian R. Chertow, Daniel C. Esty,  Where is global waste  management heading? An analysis of solid waste sector commitments from  nationally-determined contributions. Waste Management 80:137–143. Jones, N., Halvadakis, C. P., & Sophoulis, C. M. . Social capital and house - hold solid waste management policies: A case study in Mytilene, Greece.  Environmental Politics, 20 , 264–283. Joos, W., Carabias, V., Winistoerfer, H., & Stuecheli, A. . Social aspects of  public waste management in Switzerland. Waste Management, 19 , 417–425.2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   38 Jordan, A., & Lenschow, A. . Environmental policy integration: A state of  the art review. Environmental Policy and Governance, 20 , 147–158. Kay, A., & Baker, P. . What can causal process tracing offer to policy stud - ies? A review of the literature. The Policy Studies Journal, 43 , 1–21. Kennedy, C. A., Stewart, I., Facchini, A., Cersosimo, I., Mele, R., Chen, B., et al.  . Energy and material flows of megacities. Proceedings of the National  Academy of Sciences, 112 , 5985–5990. Keskitalo, E.  C. H., Juhola, S., Baron, N., Fyhn, H., & Klein, J. .  Implementing local climate change adaptation and mitigation actions: The role  of various policy instruments in a multi-level governance context.  Climate, 4 , 7. Koehler, D. . The effectiveness of voluntary environmental programs-a  policy at a crossroads? Policy Studies Journal, 35 , 689–722. Le Tourneau, R. . Australia’s e-waste ending up in toxic African  dump, torn apart by children . ABC News. Online: https://www.abc.net. au/news/2017-03-10/australian-e-waste-endingup-in-toxic-african- dump/8339760 Lindhqvist, T. . Extended producer responsibility in cleaner production .  IIIEE Dissertations 2000: 2. IIIEE, Lund University, Sweden. Martin, S. . Scott Morrison to push premiers to improve apalling record on  plastic recycling . The Guardian. Online: https://www.theguardian.com/ australia-news/2019/aug/08/scottmorrison-to-push-premiers-to-improve- appalling-record-on-plastic-recycling McNicholas, G., & Cotton, M. . Stakeholder perceptions of marine plastic  waste management in the United Kingdom. Ecological Economics, 163 , 77–87. Miyamoto, T. . Why regulators adopt voluntary programs: A theoretical  analysis of voluntary pollutant reduction programs. Environmental Economics  and Policy Studies, 18 , 599–623. Monbiot, G. . Britain’s dirty secret: The burning tyres choking India . The  Guardian. Wed 30 January Online: https://www.theguardian.com/comment- isfree/2019/jan/30/worse-thanplastic-burning-tyres-india-george-monbiot Morrissey, A. J., & Browne, J. . Waste management models and their appli - cation to sustainable waste management. Waste Management, 24 , 297–308. Morgenstern, R. D., & Pizer, W. A. . . Reality check: The nature and  performance of voluntary environmental programs in the United States, Europe,  and Japan . Washington, DC: Resource Future. National Audit Office . . The packaging and recycling obligations . Online:  https://www.nao.org.uk/press-release/the-packaging-recycling-obligations/ Nguyen, A and Roth, R. . Plastic in the ocean is not the fault of the global  south . The Conversation. Online: https://theconversation.com/plastic-in-the- oceans-is-not-the-fault-of-theglobal-south-110247 S. M. JONES 39 Nilsson, F., & Harring, N. . The large-scale collective action dilemma of  recycling: Exploring the role of trust . Working Paper: 15. Quality of Government  Institute, University of Gothenberg. Nuss, P., & Eckelman, M. . Life cycle assessment of metals: A scientific  synthesis. PLoS One, 9 , e101298. OECD. . Voluntary approaches for environmental policy: An assessment .  Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/greengrowth/tools-  evaluation/   15357687.pdf . OECD. . Municipal waste generation and treatment. OECD environmental  statistics  . Retrieved from https://stats.oecd.org/Index. aspx?DataSetCode=MUNW . OECD. . Improving plastics management: Trends, policy responses, and the  role of international co-operation and trade.  Retrieved from https://www.oecd. org/environment/waste/policy-  highlights-  improving-  plastics-   management.pdf . OECD. . The circular economy in cities and regions . Retrieved from http:// www.oecd.org/cfe/regional-  policy/Circular-  economy-  brochure.pdf . OECD. . Trust in government . Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/ gov/trust-  in- government.htm . Paton, B. . Voluntary environmental initiatives and sustainable industry. In  P. ten Brink , Voluntary environmental agreements  . Routledge. PC . . Waste Management , Report no.  38, Canberra. Petts, J. . Municipal waste management: Inequities and the role of delibera - tion. Risk Analysis, 20 , 821–832. Pires, A., Martinho, G., & Chang, N.  B. . Solid waste management in  European countries: A review of systems analysis techniques. Journal of  Environmental Management, 92 , 1033–1050. Powell, J. T., Chertow, M. R., & Esty, D. C. . Where is global waste man - agement heading? An analysis of solid waste sector commitments from nation - ally-determined contributions. Waste Management, 80 , 137–143. Prakash, A., & Potoski, M. . Voluntary environmental programs: A com - parative perspective. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 31 ,   123–138. Riding, M.  J., Herbert, B.  M., Ricketts, L., Dodd, I., Ostle, N., & Semple,  K. T. . Harmonising conflicts between science, regulation, perception  and environmental impact: The case of soil conditioners from bioenergy.  Environment International, 75 , 52–67. Ross, A., & Dovers, S. . Making the Harder Yards: Environmental Policy  Integration in Australia. Australian Journal of Public Administration,   67, 245–260.2 W ASTE MANAGEMENT: A POLICY PARADOX   40 Russel, D., & Jordan, A. . Joining up or pulling apart? The use of appraisal  to coordinate policy making for sustainable development. Environment and  Planning A, 41 , 1201–1216. Satterthwaite, D. . Cities’ contribution to global warming: Notes on the  allocation of greenhouse gas emissions. Environment and Urbanization,  20, 539–549. Savini, F. . The economy that runs on waste: Accumulation in the circular  economy. Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning, 21 , 675–691. Segerson, K. . Voluntary approaches to environmental protection and  resource management. Annual Review of Resource Economics, 5 , 161–180. Shiffman, J., & Smith, S. . Generation of political priority for global health  initiatives: A framework and case study of maternal mortality. The Lancet,  370, 1370–1379. Soltani, A., Hewage, K., Reza, B., & Sadiq, R. . Multiple stakeholders in  multi-criteria decision-making in the context of municipal solid waste manage - ment: A review. Waste Management, 35 , 318–328. SMH . . Malaysia readies to return Australia’s  plastic rubbish. Online: https://www.smh.com.au/world/asia/malaysia-read- ies-to-return-australia-s-plasticrubbish-20190528-p51s3m.html Stone, D. . Policy paradox: The art of political decision making  .  New York: W.W. Norton & Company. Tearfund. . No Time to Waste: Tackling the plastic pollution crisis before  it’s too late: https://www.tearfund.org/stories/2020/04/the-burning-issue-   of-the-plastic-crisis Tibbetts, J.  H. . Managing marine plastic pollution: Policy initiatives to  address wayward waste.  Retrieved from https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/ full/10.1289/ehp.123-  A90. UNEP , 2005. Solid Waste  Management , vol. 1. UNEP. United Nations . . United Nations Conference on Sustainable  Development, Rio+20 . Online: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/rio20 United Nations Development Programme . . World leaders adopt  sustainable development goals . Retrieved from https://www.undp.org/con- tent/undp/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2015/09/24/undp-   welcomes-  adoption-  of- sustainable-  development-  goals-  by- world-  leaders.html . Zaman, A. U. . Measuring waste management performance using the ‘zero  waste index’: The case of Adelaide, Australia. Journal of Cleaner Production,  66, 407–419. Zickfeld, K., Solomon, S., & Gilford, D. M. . Centuries of thermal sea-level  rise due to anthropogenic emissions of short-lived greenhouse gases. Proceedings  of the National Academy of Sciences, 114 , 657–662. S. M. JONES 41 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7_3CHAPTER 3 The Promise of the Circular Abstract  This chapter focuses on the cir cular economy. Of particular  interest is the theoretical background to the concept. Contemporary gov - ernment responses are also outlined with particular attention to the drivers  and barriers governments face in implementing policies to promote a cir - cular economy. The conclusion suggests that governments need to estab - lish a political priority for policy change to help ensure that; circular  approaches can be taken in implementing waste management policies. Keywords  Circular economy • Drivers and barriers • Policy change •  Political priority 3.1  Introduct Ion The promise of the circular economy is future prosperity based on a  closed-loop system that will benefit business, citizens and the environ - ment. Milios  argues the concept is ‘combining old and well  established notions of resource efficiency while making explicit the eco - nomic aspect of saving resources and the potential gains it accrues’. The  concept of a circular economy has its roots in industrial ecology, which  envisions a form of material symbiosis between otherwise very different  companies and production processes . Industrial ecology  emphasises the benefits of recycling residual waste materials and  42 by- pr oducts through, for example, the development of complex interlink - ages, such as those in industrial symbiosis projects. Transition to the circu - lar economy requires cooperation across government, industry and society  towards key objectives. Through the concept of stewardship, manufactur - ers will be required to rethink how they design products and use resources  in more sustainable ways by focusing on binding arrangements that are  determined by the entire life cycle of their products. Designers and engi - neers will be encouraged to focus on innovative, resource efficient design  that allows products to be easily disassembled and repaired. Businesses will  be encouraged to look at new business models that prioritise circular activ - ities, like the prevention of consumption and moving from product sales  to the leasing and servicing of products. Retailers, distributors and manu - facturers will all be encouraged to take greater responsibility for reducing  waste by supporting the return, refurbishment and recycling of end-of-life  products. Consumers will be encouraged to make informed purchasing  decisions that create demand for circular and sustainable products and  commodities, including reusable and durable products and products made  from recycled content. Increased use of sharing platforms and repair hubs  that extend the use and life of a product are also important. The reduction  of waste and the promotion of recycling industries are critical to circular  approaches in collecting waste materials and end-of-life products and pro - cessing them for use in new products, ensuring they remain in the eco - nomic loop and their value retained. Government policy plays an important  role in supporting the transition by industry and society and promoting  widespread penetration of circular objectives. This chapter outlines cur - rent policy focus and discusses the drivers and barriers governments face  when choosing to pursue a transition from a linear to a circular economy. 3.2  A cIrcul Ar Economy Researchers and policymakers advocating the circular economy regard it as  an alternative to the prevailing model of economic development. The con - ventional open-ended system, generally known as the ‘linear economy’,  based on the ‘take, make and dispose’ model is unsustainable, which  Andersen  describes in this simple diagram . In the model, natural resources  are used in production , to  develop  consumer goods and capital goods , with the aim of creat - ing  utility or welfare. This model is seen as problematic and faces  considerable challenges in terms of economic, social and environmental  S. M. JONES 43 sustainability, and, as a result, so does the modern economic system  . The twin issues of reliance on finite resources and  the environmental damage caused by waste mean that discussions on the  future of the model have been given potency in contemporary debates on  climate change mitigation and sustainable development. The circular  model is discussed as a more sustainable cyclical flow model which reduces  negative environmental impact by reducing reliance on virgin resources  and recycling existing resources from waste. Academically, the concept  emerges from industrial ecology, industrial symbiosis, product-service sys - tems, remanufacturing, corporate responsibility, sharing economy and  zero waste . The circular approach places emphasis on  product, component and material reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishment,  repair, renewable energy utilisation throughout the product value chain,  and cradle-to-cradle life cycle. Andersen  also presents a simple  model of a circular model . In this model, the components of  for recycling and  for waste  are added to close the loop so the economy becomes circular. Andersen   points out that not all waste can be recycled, ‘partly due to  missed opportunities and partly due to some basic physical laws’. How  such waste can be managed remains a challenging issue involving the  potentially environmentally harmful options of landfill and incineration.RP CU KFig. 3.1  The  conventional open-   ended economy   R rP W Environment as waste sinkCUFig. 3.2  The simplified  closed-loop cir cular  economy  3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   44 The application and focus towards a circular economy in different  countries tends to be based on institutional and political factors. Studies of  the approach in China, for example, have revealed a top-down focus with  a national political strategy, with implementation structured following  both a horizontal and a vertical approach .  Circular policies in China target the different levels of industrial/societal  systems and seem to draw directly from theories of Industrial Symbiosis  and Industrial Ecology systems . China has been one of the  early adopters of the circular approach and there has been an emphasis on  eco-industry, eco-farming, green services, and the reuse and recycling  industry. In contrast the focus in the European Union , according to  Ghisellini et al. , has been primarily directed to developing efficient  and effective waste management. The discourse of zero-waste and the cir - cular economy has been championed by key players, such as the European  Commission , management consultancies, NGOs and multinational  companies, in recent years . In this regard a  circular economy is primarily discussed through the 3R principles of the  waste hierarchy of reducing, reusing and recycling (Ranta et  al. 2018 ;  Milios 2018 ). The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development  also takes a waste management–based approach  and emphasises resource efficiency and effectiveness as key values. In its  detailing of circular business models, the OECD focus in on the following: closing resource loops (the diversion of waste from disposal and subsequent  transformation into secondary raw materials), slowing resource loops or  flows (the retention of products, and their constituent materials, in the  economy for longer periods), and narrowing resource flows (generating  additional economic value from a fixed amount of natural resources).   The OECD recognises that the ideas emphasising sustainability are not  new. What is new however is the changing circumstances that are driving  the need for change as a result of the unsustainable practices established in  the linear economy, including urbanisation, heightened supply risks and  evolving consumer preferences. The circular model is seen as an effective  way to improve efficiency through replacing traditional material inputs  with bio-based and renewable source materials. Ideally, however, recycled  materials should form the bulk of materials used in production processes  . S. M. JONES 45 The promotion of the circular economy by the EU takes a similar focus  to that of the OECD. Unlike the voluntary guidelines taken by the OECD,  the EU approach has been to promote the introduction of mandatory  legislation with regulations and directives that are binding for member  countries. In 2014, the European Commission released Towards a circular  economy: A zero waste programme for Europe , emphasising the link between  the circular economy and waste management. The EU claimed the eco - nomic benefits of a circular economy would be numerous, including  enhancing the security of supply for raw materials, stimulating GDP  growth, strengthening the competitiveness of businesses in the EU, and  helping to protect the environment . The EU  Directive 2018/851 on waste updates a 2008 Directive and establishes  targets for waste prevention, reuse and recycling that reflect the EU ambi - tion to move to a circular economy. There has been mixed response by  member states to the 2008 Directive so in 2018. The EU argued that it  needed to set clear targets to improve performance: Many Member States have not yet completely developed the necessary waste  management infrastructure. It is therefore essential to set clear long-term  policy objectives in order to guide measures and investments, notably by  preventing the creation of structural overcapacities for the treatment of  residual waste and lock-ins of recyclable materials at the lower levels of the  waste hierarchy.  The EU Parliament argues that since its original Directive not enough  has been done to shift the economy towards more circular practices. For  this to occur, it had become necessary to take additional measures on sus - tainable production and consumption. The 2018 Directive emphasises the  important role of municipalities, as the countries that perform well in  terms of waste management do so because they have developed efficient  municipal waste systems. The central argument for reform stresses that the  more ‘efficient use of resources would also bring substantial net savings for  Union businesses, public authorities and consumers, while reducing total  annual greenhouse gas emissions’ . Critique of the 2008  Directive was directed at what was seen as an overemphasis on recycling  over the other pillars of the circular economy, particularly the prevention  of waste in the first place by changing attitudes to consumption. Other  issues included promoting the reuse of materials and delinking process  with the introduction of policies at all stages of waste production and 3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   46 disposal . By focusing on the municipal level,  the EU again demonstrates that its version of the circular economy is  focused on the ‘end of the life cycle’ with the aim to limit resource loss and  increase the circulation of materials mainly through recycling (Milios  2018 , 867). Many member states of the EU adopt their individual policy approach  to achieve the targets set in the 2018 Directive. The EU regulations are  taken as a minimum standard and some countries have set higher targets.  Data collected to measure progress reveals inconsistent levels of recycling,  landfill and incineration across the EU, as illustrated in Fig.  3.3. Research by the European Environment Agency shows that 19 out of  35 EU countries increased their recycling rates by 10% over the period of  the 2008 Directive. In some countries, such as Estonia, Malta and Serbia,  the very low proportion of recycled municipal waste barely changed (EEA  2019 ). Results suggest that there are inconsistencies in the approaches  taken and factors unique to each jurisdiction that impact on the actions  taken and the results achieved. One clear indicator from the results is the  correlation between recycling and landfilling. The EEA argues that there  is a link between increasing recycling rates and declining rates of landfill - ing. In countries with high municipal waste recycling rates, landfilling is  declining much faster than recycling is growing, as waste management  strategies usually move from landfilling towards a combination of  Fig. 3.3  Municipal waste tr eatment, EU + Switzerland, Norway and Iceland  (Source: CEWEP , Graph on European Waste Management 2015. In www. cewep.eu/information/data/graphs/index.html ) S. M. JONES 47 recycling and incineration . The EU Directive of 2018 rein - forces the commitment to waste management as the focus of policy action  to move from the EU from a linear to a circular economy. New targets  reinforce the importance of recycling over landfill, the mandatory separa - tion of bio-waste and the application of the ‘polluter pays’ principle  through extended producer responsibility . The EEA figures show widespread support for establishing some form of  a circular economy by the majority of EU countries. While mandatory mea - sures established by the EU have produced mixed results, there has been a  shift towards a focus on sustainability. Much of the enthusiasm for the cir - cular economy seems to be fuelled by its alleged benefits for sustainable  development . In 2013, Stahel argued that the con - cept had not reached any wide implementation stage, because policymakers  and economic actors know neither the basic principles of a circular approach,  nor their impact on the economy. There has been considerable debate on a  clear definition of a circular economy  . There  is agreement that it is a contested concept . Scholars  seem to have reached a common understanding on a ‘meta-definition’  based on analysis of the circular economy literature. Accordingly, in the  literature there seems to be some agreement that a circular economy: Table 3.1  EU waste management tar gets 2020–2035  Waste management Targets and  dates Increase rates of reuse and recycling of municipal waste 55% by 2025 60% by 2030 65% by 2035 Increase recycling of packaging waste 65% by 2025 70% by 2030 Reduce landfill to a maximum % of generated municipal waste 10% by 2035 Ban on landfilling of waste suitable for recycling By 2030 Mandatory separate collection of bio-waste By December  2023 Mandatory separation of textiles and hazardous waste from households By January  2025 Minimum requirements for all extended producer responsibility Simplified and improved definitions and harmonised calculation  methods for recycling rates throughout the EU Source: Author derived from 3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   48 describes an economic system that is based on business models which replace  the ‘end-of-life’ concept with reducing, alternatively reusing,  recy - cling  materials in production/distribution and consumption processes,  , with the aim to accomplish sustainable development, which implies  creating environmental quality, economic prosperity and social equity, to the  benefit of current and future generations.  Both the EU and OECD argue that there is no official definition of the  concept of a circular economy . The application  of the concept becomes problematic when it comes to informing policy  processes, as it includes specialised terms that are challenging to conceptu - alise and operationalise at a policy level. Common terms used in relation  to a circular economy such as ‘restorative’ and ‘regenerative’ are not clear  enough in a policy context, while ‘superior design’ is rather an arbitrary  term not related to any criteria or assessment . Despite  the lack of clarity, the enthusiasm for a circular economy continues and  various policy initiatives have been adopted and implemented by govern - ments claiming to be promoting circular over linear approaches. 3.3  PolIcy Focus Which aspect of the circular model a government chooses as its policy  focus will be influenced by multiple factors. As McConnell  argues,  we need to recognise that governments do ‘policy’ as well as ‘politics’. It  would be ‘naïve to suggest that the processes of policy making, or the  types of policies chosen are devoid of the political interests of parties or  government’ . Policy options are assessed in terms of their poten - tial political costs and benefits to government. What determines the choice  has been the subject of inquiry by policy scientists. Policy choice can be  influenced by evidence, intuition, ideology, conventional wisdom or, at  best, theory alone . Typical circular responses tend to pro - mote recycling, and support for incineration, labelled as ‘waste to energy’   initiatives. Incineration is regarded as another form of disposal  because of the pollution generated and the missed opportunities of reus - ing valuable resources. Governments also make statements about looking  for ways to reduce waste through stewardship requirements, or ‘zero- waste’ initiatives that are typically based around voluntary arrangements  with industry. Waste management is seen as critical component of a  S. M. JONES 49 circular economy as it concerns the end point of the manufacturing pro - cess where opportunities for economic benefit have been otherwise lost in  linear arrangements. For the OECD, the circular economy is transformative, systemic and  functional and involves three key aspects:  1. It implies behavioural and cultural change towards different produc - tion and consumption pathways, new business and governance  models in a shared responsibility across levels of government and  stakeholders.  2. It pr ovides an opportunity for complementarities across water,  waste, energy, transport, housing and land use.  3. Inflows and outflows of materials, r esources and products require a  reaction on the appropriate scale at which the circular economy is  applied and on functional linkages across urban and rural areas  . OECD member countries have been developing circular policies to  promote what they see as a necessary transition to more sustainable  approaches. Based on the 3R principles of reduce, reuse, and recycle, these  countries have placed emphasis on waste management as the key CE pol - icy action. The example of Denmark typifies the approaches taken by  national governments in the OECD: It is the goal that by 2050 Denmark will be a society that recirculates materi - als and products to the extent that waste no longer exists. A society that  solely uses the resources that our one and only planet can replace. Every  country in the world will be forced to go through this transformation, which  will generate growing global demand for circular technologies and solu - tions.  City governments also commit to establishing a circular economy pri - marily through the adoption to waste management approaches. The  Canadian city of Vancouver follows the typical pattern of city governments  attempting to use the circular economy  as a means of marketing their  ‘green’ credentials. A graphic illustration of the role waste plays in the OECD’s ideas about  promoting reduced demand on finite resources can be seen in the impact  of circular business model on the linear economy as shown in Fig.  3.4.3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   50 Countries have adopted a range of policy instruments designed to pro - mote a shift towards more circular practices. Table  3.2 provides examples  from select OECD countries designed with the aim of reforming waste  management practices. While there are some commonalities, there are also  Fig. 3.4  The impact of cir cular business models on the linear economy (OECD  2019a , 26)Vancouver Zero Waste Strategy With Council’s direction and input from residents and stakeholders, staff have  developed Zero Waste 2040, a plan for moving the city towards becoming a zero- waste community. Moving in this direction increases Vancouver’s resiliency to  growing demands on limited available waste disposal facilities, including the  Vancouver Landfill, mitigates future risk to Vancouver taxpayers, and supports the  management of waste materials as resources. The Plan recognizes the need for, and  supports a transition to, a more circular economy; shifting away from a traditional  ‘extract-produce-consume-dispose’ economy to one in which materials remain in  circulation. By de-coupling economic prosperity with the generation of waste, this  plan provides an opportunity for innovation and attracting new businesses creating  more ‘green’ and inclusive jobs. In the long term, the implementation of this plan  will support the City’s vision of becoming the greenest city in the world and make  Vancouver a more resilient city in the face of climate change and increasingly scarce  and costly resources . S. M. JONES 51 differences, suggesting there needs to be consideration of contextual  issues when examining this area of policy. Governments examining options for effective policies recognise that  individual policies can induce particular desired outcomes. In terms of  waste management effective circular policies can increase the potential of  resource circulation across the different stages of a product’s life cycle,  depending on the focus of each policy. Research suggests an emphasis on  one aspect of circularity such as recycling can act as a barrier to other  important elements, such as reuse. Legislative support for recycling and  waste-to-energy measures actually do little to help reduce consumption.  Research shows that recycling only closes the loop between post-use and  production and does not influence the speed of the flow of materials or  goods through the economy . To help support policy con - sistency and prevent contradictory policy implementation the EU   Action Plan for establishing a circular economy recommends the imple - mentation of policy measures covering the full life cycle of products from  production to consumption, to waste management and the market for  secondary raw materials . How countries progress to a circular economy is subject to consider - able debate. There is a growing literature attempting to identify the main  challenges and barriers to the implementation of circular initiatives. Galvão  et al.  reveal a range of barriers that fall into categories including Table 3.2  Select policy instr uments OECD member country Select CE policy instruments Netherlands Landfill ban Pay as you throw pricing Full cost recovery of waste management costs Procurement used as a tool for promoting CE—support for  recycled goods Korea Pay as you throw pricing, volume-based waste fee Extended producer responsibility Use of eco-labels for public procurement Target areas where high risk of non-compliance France Legislation on consumption and prevention of planned product  obsolescence Product durability legislation Legislated product guarantee Source: Author 3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   52 technical, policy and regulatory, financial, managerial, customer and social.  De Jesus and Mendonça  examine social, regulatory and institu - tional barriers, and argue that more work needs to be done on identifying  the limitations of technical innovation. Ranta et  al.  suggest an  institutional approach to identify regulative, normative, and cultural-cog - nitive pillars that serve as critical barriers. Common to these assessments is  the view that government policy and regulations are fundamental to  whether advances can be made or whether progress remains limited. The patchy record of past EU circular policy initiatives in achieving  non-linear sustainable resource use and waste management outcomes sup - ports the view that the current package is unlikely to generate the degrees  of social, economic and technological change required by the circular  economy . Ranta et al.  examine barriers in  China, the US and Europe and conclude that the narrow policy and regu - latory focus on recycling as one of the pillars of a circular economy stands  as a critical barrier to the other pillars of reduce and reuse. Given the array  of barriers that implementation faces , successfully  disrupting the deeply entrenched, unsustainable patterns of production  and consumption requires, more radical approaches to policy design than  circular economy proponents currently acknowledge (Fitch-Roy et  al.  2019 , 14). There appears to be a need to shift from current incremental  approaches of the past to more radical policy approaches if system-wide  change is to occur. The material covered so far in this chapter reveals that  there are mixed results between countries, in achieving even the funda - mentals of a circular economy. According to the assessments of drivers and  barriers to achieving a circular economy, government policy plays a critical  role. The next section examines both the drivers and the barriers to the  implementation of a circular economy so we can have a clearer under - standing of the current situation, particularly as we examine attempts to  promote higher levels of sustainable development through applying circu - lar principles to waste management. 3.4  drIvErs And BArrIErs Research by the OECD reveals that the ‘market penetration of circular  business models remains limited’ . Countries such as China  and the Netherlands are seen to be leading examples. Van Buren et al.   highlight the contribution of government policy to the effec - tiveness of circular initiatives for local business. They argue that the Dutch  S. M. JONES 53 national government has been actively supporting bio-based economy,  and, subsequently, circular economy. It has become an important pro - gramme within the Environmental directory, named ‘from waste to  resources’, and in the economic ‘green growth’ policy. A governmental  programme has been developed in collaboration with sustainable business  associations, to explain and promote circular economy to SMEs across the  country, to provide training and start-up support, and to communicate  best practices. Budget has been allocated to scientific research into circular  business models. Geissdoerfer et al.  show that a few countries have  taken the lead in the conceptual development of a circular economy, with  China as the top-ranking country, which, they argue, is not surprising  given its legislative approach through the Circular Economy Promotion  Law. If governments are to move beyond proclamations of their support  for a circular economy, more radical approaches to policy design are  required. The OECD  recognises that government policy plays an  important role in promoting more widespread penetration of circular  approaches. If systems of governance are to deliver the radical public pol - icy needed, then political priority is a critical requirement to facili - tate change. In 2019, the OECD conducted a survey on the status of the circular  economy in 34 cities and regions , and the main  tools, obstacles and good practices available to date. The survey targeted  cities and regions at any level of implementation of circular economy ini - tiatives, from pioneers to newcomers . Cultural barriers Regulato ry framework Financial resource s Holistic vision Adequate inf ormation Incoherent regulation Financial risk Awareness Critical scale Human resource s Private sec tor engagement Political will Technological solutions Major obstacle Important obstacle29% 29% 32% 38%44%44% 21% 41% 18% 38%22% 50% 18% 44% 6% 35% 15% 21% 9% 26%38% 15%24% 35% 21% 29% Fig. 3.5  OECD Sur vey on circular economy in cities and regions 3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   54 The survey results highlight the importance of cultural barriers which  include public attitudes to consumption, waste disposal and recycling as  critical to transitioning to a circular economy. Similarly, financial resources  are needed to overcome market failures and facilitate the development of  new recycling facilities that may not have established markets. The support  of government policy that establishes regulatory frameworks that support  the transition to a circular economy and promote vertical and horizontal  cooperation and coordination of policy initiatives. Further research by the  OECD reviewed the waste management practices of member countries  and the linkage of circular principles to waste. The findings support the  need for proactive government policy in establishing a regulatory frame - work and to reduce barriers to the implementation of circular approaches  throughout the waste management process. A key barrier to the implementation of a comprehensive and coherent circu - lar economy policy mix can be the absence of an effective institutional  framework. In order to develop and implement policies that support the  move to a circular economy, OECD countries should seek to build broad  government support and inter-ministerial co-ordination for effective poli - cies that address all stages of the materials life-cycle.  The OECD elaborates further on these obstacles and recognises seven  common barriers and limitations to the adoption of circular models and  provides suggested policy responses for governments, as outlined in  Table  3.3. 3.5  conclus Ion Identifying the drivers and barriers to implement circular policies is an  important first step to help focus policy priority to areas of relevance and  impact. There is an emerging literature highlighting implementation  issues, and this will help identify the areas requiring political priority for  the development of relevant waste management policy. Ranta et al.   have undertaken a comprehensive analysis, based on an institutional  approach, and reveal a cross-section of policy-related issues that can help  guide policymakers. The attraction of an institutional approach is that it  provides a lens that reveals social, political and cultural aspects that form a  complex asymmetry of factors that help guide political attention and pol - icy action. Critical to our understanding of political priority, an  S. M. JONES 55 Table 3.3  Common bar riers to circular business model adoption and potential  policy response  Barrier Policy response Traditional business models use virgin  resources that are cheaper than  recycled materialPolicy can help to ensure that the full  environmental costs of production and  consumption activities are reflected in market  prices. Design decisions in traditional  manufacturing models do not adopt  material recovery and product life  extension. Built in obsolescence  reduces useful life of raw and  manufactured materials.Policy can help to improve collaboration within  and across sectoral value chains. Fostering  industrial symbiosis clusters, promoting online  material marketplaces, establishing secondary raw  material certification schemes and, more  generally, facilitation of cooperation within and  across value chains may be worthwhile initial  steps. Subsidies and taxes can favour use of  natural resources and favour  traditional modes of economic  production.Policymakers could consider what objectives  existing fiscal policy is serving, and whether a  fiscal realignment could lead to improved  environmental and equity outcomes. Status quo biases effectively lend  inertia to current patterns of economic  development, often at the expense of  the emergence of circular business  models.Policy could therefore aim to ensure that existing  regulatory frameworks are coherent and fit for  purpose, and not serving to preserve an existing  status quo. In some cases, the development of  markets for circular products and  services appears to be held back by a  lack of consumer interest.Policymakers could consider how existing  educational and information programmes can be  improved to provide individuals with a better  understanding of the unintended consequences  of their consumption choices. The use of  behavioural insights and nudges, such as through  labelling requirements, may be a promising way  forward. Policymakers interested in promoting  the more widespread adoption of  circular business models could  implement a range of additional  enabling policy measures.Examples of the former include eco-design  standards, strengthened EPR schemes, and the  provision of targeted R&D funding. Examples of  the latter include differentiated VAT rates,  recycled content mandates, product labelling  standards, and green public procurement. Transition to a more resource efficient  and circular economy will be at least  partially driven by the diffusion of  material efficient production  technologies and the emergence of  more cost-competitive circular  business models.Policy can influence the composition (and  therefore the environmental footprint) of the  rebound effect by ensuring that the full social  costs of production and consumption are  reflected in market prices.3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   56 institutional approach identifies the regulatory aspects that can both sup - port and inhibit the adoption of and transition to a circular economy  . Examples they provide show how regulations,  such as a ban on landfill, can help to support circular initiatives by discour - aging wastefulness and motivating circularity. De Jesus  and Mendonça   regard institutional and regulatory factors as soft drivers and bar - riers. For them the emphasis on public policy measures such as legal frame - works, taxes, incentives and infrastructure development help address  market failures as well as supporting opportunities for innovation and  entrepreneurship that shift the economy to greater levels of circularity.  Government policy plays the leading role in promoting the institutional  framework. In their analysis of China, the US and the EU, Ranta et al.   found that poorly designed regulatory barriers are one of the most  important factors limiting the development of a circular economy.  Government regulations also impact on the social and cultural factors rel - evant to a circular economy. For example, education campaigns can inform  citizens and promote behaviour change to less wasteful practices. Well- designed evidence-based government regulations can support cultural  norms that regard sustainability as an important and desirable aspect of  economic activity. In addition, accurate and appropriate definitions of  waste can stem from government policies that identify waste as a resource  for reuse and recycling. Despite the challenges, there is still enthusiasm for the concept of a  circular economy as a framework for future sustainable economic develop - ment. Government policy will continue to be a key aspect future transi - tion. Policymakers examining methods of establishing circular approaches  will operate within the constraints of their institutional arrangements  where radical change may not be possible. The focus on closing loops  places a circular economy at odds with many of the norms, logics and  routines of the linear economy, which, in many ways, makes it counterin - tuitive to established economic patterns for growth. Long-standing modes  of governing the waste systems have established social, institutional, and  financial arrangements benefiting policy actors and organisations based on  linear arrangements . The argument  of this book is that moving to more effective approaches will require fac - ing the challenges and barriers highlighted in the literature. Political prior - ity needs to be given to move beyond current approaches. We need to  examine what is required to accord these issues a higher policy priority to  help ensure that more radical approaches are adopted. Public policy  S. M. JONES 57 literature could provide the answers to this question. There is a need for  policy design, for policy coherence and to broaden the scope of circular  policy to reflect all pillars of a circular economy not just recycling. For  effective transition to occur, these matters need to achieve high political  priority on the policy agenda of government to promote change. In the  next chapter, a framework based on this literature will be proposed as a  means of understanding the complexities of establishing political priority  and policy change. rEFErEncEs Andersen, M. S. . An introductory note on the environmental economics of  the circular economy. Sustainability Science, 2 , 133–140. Banks, G. . Evidence-based policy making: What is it? How do we get it?  . Productivity  Commission, Canberra. Bulkeley, H., Watson, M., & Hudson, R. . Modes of governing municipal  waste. Environment and Planning A, 39 , 2733–2753. De Jesus, A., & Mendonça, S. . Lost in transition? Drivers and barriers in  the eco-innovation road to the circular economy. Ecological Economics,  145, 75–89. EC . . Closing the loop—An EU action plan for  the circular economy. Retrieved from https://www.eea.europa.eu/policy-   documents/com-  2015-  0614-  final. EEA. . Recycling municipal waste . Retrieved from https://www.eea. europa.eu/airs/2018/resource-  efficiency-  and-  low-  carbon-  economy/ recycling-  of- municipal-  waste . European Parliament. . Turning waste into a resource: Moving towards a  ‘circular economy’ . Retrieved from http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/ etudes/BRIE/2014/545704/EPRS_BRI545704_REV1_EN.pdf . European Union . . Quality of public administration—A toolbox for  practitioners. Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu›esf›BlobServlet . European Union . . Directive  2018/851 of the European  Parliament and of the Council. Amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste.  Retrieved from https://eur-  lex.europa.eu/legal-  content/EN/TXT/PDF/?ur i=CELEX:32018L0851&from=EN . Fitch-Roy, O., Benson, D., & Monciardini, D. . Going around in circles?  Conceptual recycling, patching and policy layering in the EU circular economy  package. Environmental Politics, 29 , 983–1003. https://doi.org/10.108 0/09644016.2019.1673996 .3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   58 Galvão, G. D. A., de Nadae, J., Clemente, D. H., Chinen, G., & de Carvalho,  M.  M. . Circular economy: Overview of barriers. Procedia CIRP,  73, 79–85. Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N. M., & Hultink, E. J. . The circu - lar economy–A new sustainability paradigm? Journal of Cleaner Production,  143, 757–768. Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., & Ulgiati, S. . A review on circular economy: The  expected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and economic sys - tems. Journal of Cleaner Production, 114 , 11–32. Kirchherr, J., Piscicelli, L., Bour, R., Kostense-Smit, E., Muller, J., Huibrechtse-   Truijens, A., & Hekkert, M. . Barriers to the circular economy: Evidence  from the European Union . Ecological Economics, 150 , 264–272. Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., & Hekkert, M. . Conceptualizing the circular  economy: An analysis of 114 definitions. Resources, Conservation and Recycling,  127, 221–232. Korhonen, J., Honkasalo, A., & Seppälä, J. . Circular economy: The con - cept and its limitations. Ecological Economics, 143 , 37–46. Mazzanti, M., & Zoboli, R. . Waste generation, waste disposal and policy  effectiveness: Evidence on decoupling from the European Union. Resources,  Conservation and Recycling, 52 , 1221–1234. McConnell, A. . Understanding policy success: Rethinking public policy .  Macmillan International Higher Education. Milios, L. . Advancing to a circular economy: Three essential ingredients  for a comprehensive policy mix. Sustainability Science, 13 , 861–878. OECD. . Business models for the circular economy: Opportunities and chal - lenges for policy . Paris: OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/ g2g9dd62-  en. OECD. . Waste management and the circular economy in selected OECD  countries: Evidence from environmental performance reviews . OECD  Environmental Performance Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi. org/10.1787/9789264309395-  en. OECD. . The circular economy in cities and regions . Retrieved from http:// www.oecd.org/cfe/regional-  policy/Circular-  economy-  brochure.pdf . Pollans, L. . Trapped in trash: ‘Modes of governing’ and barriers to transi - tioning to sustainable waste management. Environment and Planning A,  49, 2300–2323. Ranta, V., Aarikka-Stenroos, L., Ritala, P., & Mäkinen, S. J. . Exploring  institutional drivers and barriers of the circular economy: A cross-regional   comparison of China, the US, and Eur ope. Resources, Conservation and  Recycling, 135 , 70–82. S. M. JONES 59 Stahel, W. R. . The product life factor. In An inquiry into the nature of  sustainable societies: The role of the private sector  (Series: 1982 Mitchell Prize  Papers), NARC. Valenzuela, F., & Böhm, S. . Against wasted politics: A critique of the cir - cular economy. Ephemera: Theory & Politics in Organization, 17 , 23–60. Van Buren, N., Demmers, M., Van der Heijden, R., & Witlox, F. . Towards  a circular economy: The role of Dutch logistics industries and governments.  Sustainability, 8 , 647. Vancouver Economic Commission . . Towards a circular economy .  Retrieved from https://www.vancouvereconomic.com/research/towards-    the- circular-  economy/ . Zhijun, F., & Nailing, Y. . Putting a circular economy into practice in  China. Sustainability Science, 2 , 95–101.3 THE PROMISE OF THE CIRCULAR   61 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7_4CHAPTER 4 The Challenge of Political Priority Abstract  This chapter establishes a multi-theory framework to help  explain factors and conditions promoting a political priority for policy  change. The dimensions of the framework are outlined in the context of  waste management policy. The framework is presented as a tool for analy - sis to identify the specific characteristics contributing to the challenge of  policy change. The conclusion leads to the case study chapters that will  adopt the framework to examine the issues faced by governments in adopt - ing and implementing circular principles to establish sustainable approaches  to waste management. Keywords  Political priority • Framework • Policy change • waste  management policy 4.1  Introduct Ion In the previous chapters, some of the fundamental weaknesses of current  approaches to advancing circular objectives have been revealed. A focus on  ‘end of pipe’ policies has been at the expense of the other circular objec - tives, including social/cultural factors, particularly the reduction of con - sumption and demand-side objectives to promote greener practices and more  sustainable choices . We have seen that  despite the challenges and barriers to effectiveness, many governments  62 continue to make commitments to transitioning from a linear to a circular  economy model. Research shows that in 11 Organisation for Economic  Co-operation and Development  countries, with demonstrated  commitment to circular objectives, the appropriate institutional arrange - ments and supporting measures to facilitate the transition were often miss - ing . While the common approach has focused on waste  management, particularly recycling, other actions include green public  purchasing, public information and awareness-raising measures, and pri - vate sector initiatives, such as voluntary agreements. Achieving effective  circular approaches requires policies that address all stages of the materials  life cycle. The approach adopted by the EU 2008 Directive was to support  planning as the vehicle for change. Research now shows this has contrib - uted to the variations in performance of countries in achieving the waste  management and prevention targets .  This focus of this chapter is to suggest that raising policy priority will be  necessary for circular approaches to waste management to become a more  central or salient policy commitment. Survey research undertaken in 2018 of the circular economy plans  developed by EU members revealed that more than 85% of policy initia - tives are based largely on voluntary measures involving different types of  communicative measures in the form of information campaigns ,  cooperation , investigation  and promotion  . Close  analysis of waste plans across EU countries reveals a disinclination to  address the causes of waste generation. The ultimate purpose of waste  prevention plans should be to break ‘the link between economic growth  and the environmental impacts associated with the generation of waste’  . Yet, measures to reduce consumption  constitute less than 1% of all measures in the plans. At the national and  European levels, each plan offers only one suggested measure to reduce  consumption, while none is offered at the local level. Hence, out of 269  measures, only 2 aim to reduce consumption. Typical measures for waste  prevention in the plans are voluntary and adopt the typical lexicon of  policy initiatives that are impossible to measure with any accuracy. For  example, plans merely commit governments to ‘participate in coopera - tion’, ‘give advice’, ‘examine opportunities’, ‘develop guidance’, ‘work to  facilitate’, ‘promote’, ‘inform’, ‘identify’ and ‘coordinate’. Such measures  are soft, not legally binding, with a low degree of governmental intrusive - ness and coercion. Most importantly, these measures reflect poor policy  practice for implementation and managing performance (Van Dooren  S. M. JONES 63 et al. 2010 ). With these features there is no measurable way to determine  if government initiatives actually make a difference: relevant indicators are  difficult to develop, and policies cannot be accurately evaluated; as a  result, policy learning and improvement become extremely difficult.  Establishing institutions and designing policies to deal with the challenges  of transitioning to a circular economy requires an understanding of how  policymaking processes work, the relevant trade-offs, and the roles of  incentives and political barriers to policy implementation (Sterner  et al. 2019 ). Despite government displays of enthusiasm to take policy action, there  has been a reluctance to adopt regulatory measures. Some suggest that  the degree of difficulty for regulatory interventions is much higher than  for voluntary enabling and education-based approaches (Bulkeley 2010 ;  Rosenzweig et al. 2011 ). Governments considering mandatory measures  can face challenges including perceived adverse effects on industry in  terms of employment, productivity and profitability. Environmental regu - lations have been a particular source of debate in terms of their cost and  their negative impact on business . As an  example, how to reduce the impact of plastic from causing harm to the  environment has become a key challenge for governments (Kaza et al.  2018 ). For consumers, plastic is increasingly impossible to avoid as manu - facturers and retailers use it for convenience and durability to avoid con - tamination and extend product life . When considering  appropriate responses to plastic pollution, governments have been reluc - tant to propose mandatory measures that would reduce the volumes of  plastic in the waste stream because of the potential pushback from con - sumers, business and industry . Dauvergne   argues that the current situation, particularly with plastic  waste, ‘reflects successful industry advocacy of insipid, business-friendly  governance interventions under the guise of corporate sustainability, con - tributing to an overconfidence in the value of individual responsibility  and corporate self-governance as management principles’. As a result,  researchers continue to argue that when dealing with such environmental  issues, stronger government regulation is pivotal to effective policy  change and needs to be stricter, with binding targets and timelines  (Dauvergne 2018 ; Borrelle et al. 2017 ; Simon 2016 ; Simões and Marques  2012 ). We will see in this chapter that policy change involves understand - ing the political context, the role of key actors in the policy process, the  role of ideas in shaping public acceptance for change and influence of the 4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   64 characteristics of waste as a policy issue. This chapter will outline a multi- theory framework designed to help understand the complexities associ - ated with according these issues a higher policy priority for change. 4.2  A theoret IcAl FrAmework Building broad government support is fundamental to taking the steps  necessary towards achieving circular economy objectives to establish more  effective ways to prevent and manage waste and support environmental  sustainability . The argument in this book is that govern - ment support alone will be insufficient, and political priority for action is  required. For complex and challenging issues, political attention alone will  not ensure political action . Policy change on complex  issues requires political priority before governments commit to resourcing  interventions . If governments are to establish  effective policies needed to promote circular from linear economic sys - tems, ways are needed to be found to promote priority for policy change  with stronger regulatory commitments to circular economy objectives  that support a focus on consumption and waste prevention. Waste preven - tion is broadly considered as having greater environmental potential than  the dominant waste management practices of landfilling, energy recovery  and recycling . Waste prevention is a policy priority in  the EU Directive of 2018, and more generally a recommendation from  the OECD for the last two decades . The policy change literature provides guidance and explanation on  potential options and consequences to promote priority for stronger  action. A framework influenced by multiple policy change theories will  help reveal a range of dimensions and their determinants that potentially  influence and shape political priority . The core argument  here is that with political priority the likelihood of policy change towards  achieving circular economy objectives will be increased. The framework  consists of four interrelated dimensions: political context, power of actors,  the influence of ideas and problem characteristics. Kay and Baker   argue that theoretical pluralism, as it is applied in the framework, allows  researchers to consider multiple variables and to elaborate on relationships.  The framework does not establish direct causation for policy change but  outlines a series of determinants from which causal inferences can be drawn. No single determinant in the framework is sufficient or necessary to  generate priority for policy change, but each contributes to increase its  S. M. JONES 65 Table 4.1  Framework on dimensions of political priority setting Dimension Description Determinants shaping political priority Political  contextPolitical and  institutional  environments in  which actors  operateConstitutional responsibilities of government in  multilevel systems. Policy windows: political moments, including events,  when conditions align favourably, presenting  opportunities for advocates to influence  decision-makers Governance structure: the degree to which norms and  institutions operating in a sector provide a platform  for effective collective action Power of  ActorsStrength of  individuals and  organisations  concerned with  the issuePolicy community cohesion: degree of coalescence  among the network of individuals and organisations  centrally involved with the issue Leadership: the presence of individuals capable of  uniting the policy community and particularly strong  champions for the cause Political parties: the extent to which political parties  can facilitate or block policy priority leading to  regulation Civil society mobilisation: the extent to which, for  example grassroots organisations and academics  mobilise to press political authorities to address the  issue Industry mobilisation: extent to which corporations  mobilise to pressure political authorities to address  climate issues Influence of  ideasHow actors  understand and  portray the issueInternal frame: degree to which the policy community  agrees on the issue definition, causes and solutions External frame: public portrayals of the issue in ways  that resonate with external audiences, especially  political leaders Problem  characteristicsFeatures of the  problemCredible indicators: clear measures that show policy  action to be effective Severity: the size of the burden relative to other  problems, as indicated by objective measures. The  urgency of the problem prompted by an event/crisis Effective interventions: extent to which proposed  solutions are clearly explained, cost-effective, backed  by scientific evidence, simple to implement and  inexpensive Source: Author; derived from: Jones, S. . Establishing political priority for regulatory interventions  in waste management in Australia. Australian Journal of Political Science, 55 , 211–2274 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   66 likelihood. Similarly, in some instances, there may be overlap between the  determinants. For example, there is a recognised link between how policy  problems are framed, how the problem is understood and the nature of  the political action taken. It is the proposition of this book that the politi - cal priority framework can be used to investigate factors restricting or  facilitating more coordinated and regulated policy action in the context of  achieving circular economy objectives. The book’s theoretical contribu - tion examines how these various parts can integrate to promote or chal - lenge policy change. In doing so, the framework will identify established  power relationships among key actors, the material structures established  to support their power, and the ideational framing that contributes to  challenging the status quo. 4.3  explAInIng the FrAmework 4.3.1   Political Context As a star ting point, the institutionalism literature highlights the need to  understand political context to guide actors within institutional structures  that significantly influence establishing priority to instigate policy change  . Bell argues that ‘institutions matter in  political life. More specifically, it is about how the behaviour of political  actors is shaped and conditioned by the institutional contexts in which  they operate’ . Constitutional responsibility sets the context  for policymaking: it impacts on laws, customs and established practices  and organisational settings that can be powerful and determining for poli - cymaking. This is particularly the case in multilevel systems where policy  responsibility for specific issues can rest with one level of government. As  mentioned above, responsibility for waste management and environmen - tal issues tends to fall to subnational and local governments. The frame - work highlights three political context determinants essential for raising  the priority of policy initiatives. The first is the constitutional responsibili - ties in multilevel systems. Within federal systems subnational govern - ments’ responsibility for waste can contribute to challenges faced by  national governments if they attempt to develop consistent national  approaches. For example, state resistance to perceived interference by  national governments in Australia and the US has prevented the establish - ment of consistent approaches to waste management and the recycling  industry . A fiscal imbalance can often ensure  S. M. JONES 67 the financial weight of national governments and their capacity to incen - tivise and shape normative behaviour. These challenges are intensified in  the European Union where subnational or regional governments can limit  the consistency of changes to waste policy agreed by the European  Parliament. The impact of this has been producing inconsistent results  across the EU in terms of reducing use of landfill and promoting recycling  . Constitutional responsibilities within multilevel systems set  the context for intergovernmental relations, and, in the case of waste man - agement, they have played a significant role in determining challenges for  policy change. Where political support for policy change is weak, even after official  adoption of policy decisions, implementation will be problematic as  ambitious change could face an adverse political and administrative envi - ronment. The implementation of the waste hierarchy into waste manage - ment; policy objectives or measures promoting eco-design, recycling and  reuse; targets for decoupling waste generation from economic growth;  and extended producer responsibility schemes, these may all be seen as  means of incorporating circular economy principles into policy and legal  frameworks. Table  4.2 outlines the common contextual barriers to  implementation emerging from institutional arrangements that may  impact on the achievement of government policy change objectives. A  key barrier to a comprehensive and coherent circular economy policy mix  can be the absence of an effective institutional framework to guide policy  change. According to the OECD, in order to develop and implement  Table 4.2  Implementation bar riers: Political  barri - ers  Slow  authorisationPlans and resources mobilisation proceed very slowly due to the  existence of multiple veto points among stakeholders in a network,  making forward progress difficult Weak political  supportPlans may proceed and even attain moderate levels of success in the  pilot project stage while flying under the radar of key politicians with  opposing interests, until programme begins to scale up Bureaucratic  oppositionKey players in the inter-agency network tasked with implementing  policy slow or sabotage implementation due to low priority of the  project, lacking incentives or competing interests Poor  implementer  incentivesLocal implementers (local government coordinating executives or  front-line staff of agencies), who were not consulted during the  decision-making stage, have inadequate ‘buy-in’ or incentives to  comply with directives from below4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   68 policies that support the move to a circular economy, governments  should seek to build broad government support and inter-ministerial  coordination for effective policies that address all stages of the materials  life cycle. This will address the challenge that action in this sphere goes  beyond the remit of environment ministries. The OECD policy guidance  on resource efficiency underlines that where these institutional arrange - ments are in place, the shift to a circular economy can be treated as a  broader economic policy challenge and integrated across sectoral policy  responsibilities. Governance structures can therefore shape how an issue  will be dealt with and the prominence it can take in the context of other  policy issues. Contexts are defined as ‘complex assemblies of different elements,  including interpersonal relations, organizational cultures, structures and  procedures, legal frameworks and the political climate’ (Pollitt and Dan  2011 , 15). Kingdon  argues that irregularities, produced by either  empirical evidence or ‘focusing events’, provide policy windows where  groups or policy entrepreneurs raise problems and have opportunities to  promote change. The seminal work of Kingdon  and the Multiple  Streams Framework  brings together the dynamics of the context as  evidenced by the three ‘streams’  to  explain why particular policy issues enter the policy agenda and take on  added priority. Interlinked by the machinations of policy actors, the three  streams provide a useful tool to begin analysing causal factors behind pol - icy change. The second determinant in the framework considers the influ - ence of institutional context as it involves consideration of government  responses to policy windows as they emerge. Crisis and elections are often  seen as part of the context that can impact on policy as they become ‘pol - icy windows’ for both governments to propose a policy commitment and  for interest groups to obtain political attention and make proposals for  how the government should respond . For Baumgartner  and Jones , their punctuated equilibrium theory sees policy change  emerging in moments of abrupt and significant change as windows of  opportunity in otherwise long periods of stability. Kingdon also recognises  the importance of focusing events as policy windows that highlight a  problem and feedback on current initiatives that suggests a failure to  achieve the original policy goals; each provides various indicators to gov - ernments that reveal that a problem exists that warrants policy attention  . S. M. JONES 69 The influence of institutions and the response to windows of opportu - nity contribute to a highly complex range of contextual issues that help  shape policy change. In the context of increasing demands from constitu - ents, policymakers need to consider the third determinant of the frame - work that concerns governance arrangements that increasingly incorporate  a wide range of stakeholders that seek to influence policy change. The  OECD sees governance in terms of relationships. The instruments and  methods of governance include more than just the functions of public  administrators in managing the structures of public institutions.  Governance encompasses the many and constantly changing sets of rela - tionships between the government and the interests of citizens, who inter - act with public institutions both as individuals and as participants with  mutual interests . This dynamic emphasises the politi - cal nature of policymaking and suggests that the choice of action may be  one that faces the path of least resistance rather than the most effective  approach to a policy problem. In terms of the circular economy, this stage  will determine the course of action a government will take and which  aspects of the circular economy model will be the preferred options for  policy. In order to help understand this contextual issue, Cohen et  al.   proposed their garbage can model of decision-making. This model  applies when there is a very large number of decision-makers and an uncer - tainty about the source of problems and their potential solutions. A key  concept for this model in that of ‘satisficing’, based on what Cohen et al.  regarded as a decision that is satisfactory to the goals and standards of the  group of policymakers at the time of the decision. Decision-makers rarely  consider the range of policy choices with potentially better results.  Decision-makers simply define the goals and choose the means as they go  along in a process which is necessarily contingent and unpredictable  . Considerable research attention has  been given to how public managers need to come to terms with the politi - cal context that produces consultative and networked policymaking envi - ronments . Adopting networked approaches is no guarantee  that environmental problems will be addressed. Making decision through  this process may take a long time to produce policy change and achieve  direct benefits for citizens . Many of the most pressing and  complex waste problems, with links to the advancement of circular econ - omy objectives, emerge from the realities of the political context of  regional and global scales .4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   70 4.3.2   Power of Actors The framework pr oposes five main determinants for consideration in  examining relevant actors to influencing political priority for policy  change. These determinants borrow from Sabatier’s Advocacy Coalition  Framework  , which focuses on coalitions of gov - ernment, and non-government actors that engage in coordinated activity  to promote the common cause they want to advance. For Sabatier  , events alone are insufficient for long-term change; key policy  actors are needed in the form of an advocacy coalition that coalesces  around a policy issue. Advocacy coalitions are portrayed as ‘people from  a variety of positions (e.g., elected and agency officials, interest group  leaders, researchers) who share a particular belief system—that is, a set of  basic values, causal assumptions, and problem perceptions—and who  show a nontrivial degree of coordinated activity over time’ (Sabatier  1988 ; 139). Coalition participants seek to maintain or change policy in particular  areas of mutual interest. The ACF therefore predicts that the primary  determinant of network structure is shared systems of policy-relevant  beliefs. Members of these coalitions generate policy narratives. Whether  groups portray themselves as winning or losing, the policy narrative con - tains some stable policy core beliefs, shaped by the cultural context (social  and economic history and view of the role of government) in which the  policy issue occurs . But other elements of these nar - ratives are strategically constructed stories, intended to persuade the pub - lic and/or decision-makers of the coalition’s preferred policy outcome.  Policy beliefs are a critical element of policy narratives work as a ‘glue’ to  provide focus and purpose and ensure that the coalition is not distracted  by internal disagreement regarding the best policy outcomes and the pre - ferred policy changes. In addition to policy core beliefs, the policy narra - tives generated by these coalitions harbour divergent narrative strategies,  depending on whether the coalition portrays itself as winning or losing in  the policy subsystem . A ‘winners’ tale constructs a  story that seeks to preserve the status quo, whereas a ‘loser’s tale’ seeks  policy change. Leadership by policy entrepreneurs helps to unite a policy community  through forming a link between formation and maintenance of advocacy  coalitions . Policy entrepreneurs can define  problems and build teams in ways that maximise opportunities for  S. M. JONES 71 bringing on board coalition partners . The concept of  policy entrepreneurship helps us make sense of what happens in and  around policy communities when problems are not able to be readily  addressed within existing policy settings. But the value of the concept of  policy entrepreneurs as change agents is when it is integrated with broader  theorisations of the sources of policy stability and policy change. Policy  entrepreneurs seek to sell their policy ideas and promote dynamic policy  change. Scholars in agenda-setting literature suggest that policy entrepre - neurs use several activities to promote their ideas. These include identify - ing problems, shaping the terms of policy debates, networking in policy  circles and building coalitions. Policy entrepreneurs frequently define  policy problems in ways that both attract the attention of decision-makers  and indicate appropriate policy responses . As policy  actors, entrepreneurs attempt to assemble and maintain coalitions to sup - port specific policy ideas, which prove to be valuable political resources  during discussions of policy change . Research also highlights the role of political parties as key actors in  facilitating and blocking priority for policy change (Walgrave and Varone  2008 ; Carter and Jacobs 2014 ). Political parties are an important feature  of policy debate in parliamentary systems as jurisdictions are influenced  by agendas established by the major political parties. Evidence suggests  that unified political party groups are the rule in representative assem - blies in parliamentary democracies at the subnational level (regional,  provincial and/or local) (Denters and Klok 2013 ; Dewan and Spirling  2011 ). As an example, in Germany’s 16 state legislatures, an examination  of parliamentary voting between 1990 and 2011 is one of the most com - prehensive analyses of party voting at the subnational level, and perfect  unity was the rule rather than the exception. Similarly, research by van  Vonno  on Dutch policymaking shows that political representa - tives consider the party meeting the main decision-making center and are  more likely to engage in consensus and unanimous decision-making,  thus resulting in party agreement being a more important decision-mak - ing mechanism. Civil society mobilisation in the form of grassroots movements as policy  actors, often arise in reaction to perceived social injustices and environ - mental problems . Such actors form networks of  activists and organisations generating novel bottom–up solutions for sus - tainable development, solutions that respond to the local situation and the  interests and values of the communities involved (Seyfang and Smith 4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   72 2007 ). In contrast to mainstream business greening, grassroots initiatives  operate in civil society arenas and involve committed activists experiment - ing with social innovations as well as using greener technologies. Paying attention to effective action in civil society is crucial, and encour - aging grassroots activism with effective leadership, structure and missions  is important for policy success . Studies  show that grassroots activism strongly influenced policy change towards  the development of clean technology in the US. One example is the social  activism and social entrepreneurship in New York playing an increasingly  important role in the modern innovation process. Grassroots activities can  be significant for the generation of new and exciting ideas, and can repre - sent cost-effective ways to promote innovation. A robust grassroots ecol - ogy can be important for revitalisation of a region and a sector. Innovation  practitioners and scholars argue that policymakers should take social entre - preneurship and grassroots activism into greater account. In supporting  greener business innovation, the UK government promoted sustainable  consumption through ‘market transformation’, and the development of  more sustainable market choices for products and services .  The UK strategy recognised the contribution of small-scale local activities,  and has a particular emphasis on delivery of sustainable development at all  scales . The prime minister stated: ‘Many local  communities understand the links between the need to tackle national and  global environmental challenges and everyday actions to improve our  neighbourhoods and create better places to live’ (HM Government  2005 , 29). In some policy areas, the push for change emerges from a coalition of  actors outside government that coalesce around a specific issue and lobby  for policy change. Scholars such as Baker et al.  argue for the need  to recognise industry mobilisation as potential determinant of govern - ment acting to change specific policy. An economic focus in policy change  by governments works in favour of powerful industry stakeholders as  advocacy coalitions who continue to support voluntary market-based  approaches, as a reflection of economic ideas in structuring policy choices  . These views have worked in favour of beverage and packag - ing industries who continue to run resistance campaigns to proposals for  regulatory approaches, arguing that customers will eventually pay for reg - ulated changes through increased costs (Bertolini et al. 2007 ; Wikström  et al. 2014 ). As an example, Unilever claims that it has research that shows  only 15% of customers care enough about environmental issues to change  S. M. JONES 73 their buying habits. This research is used to argue that stronger measures  to change behaviour would be resisted by the majority .  Over the last two decades, new approaches to policy design, including co-   design and co-pr oduction, to promote effectiveness in an economically  efficient manner have seen the emergence of stronger links between indus - try and government . As an example,  Germany’s federal political system and corporatist traditions have given  sectoral industry interests privileged access to the political system (Hey  2010 , 223). Viewing the management of waste as an industry policy  implies waste diversion is the preferred option, which benefits vested inter - ests seeking to expand economic opportunities in recycling, landfill and  energy. Election commitments by the Australian government in 2019,  allocating funds to identifying waste-processing technologies that, for  example, create new sources of energy, maintain the economic frame  where waste is a resource that industry can exploit for economic benefits. 4.3.3   Influence of Ideas The framework pr oposes that support for policy change can be influenced  by the way actors frame ideas, or the way in which an issue is understood  or portrayed publicly . How an issue is  framed contributes to how it resonates with stakeholders which can help  move ‘essential individuals and organisations to action, especially political  leaders who control the resources that policy initiatives need’ (Shiffman  and Smith 2007 ; 1371–72). Beland suggests that ‘ideas can take the form  of economic and social assumptions that either legitimize or challenge  existing institutions and policies’ . Waste management is cur - rently viewed largely through the economic ideas that frame waste as a  resource that needs to be managed for its value. As a key objective for the  circular economy approach, effective management of waste is seen as an  important contributor to long-term sustainable economic growth. One  of the central narratives of the circular economy is the idea that radical  institutional and policy transformations are needed to establish competi - tive economies in the future . Economic solu - tions to environmental problems reflect the neo-liberal approach towards  social and environmental policymaking, which has sought to roll back the  state’s role to look for solutions through market-based measures. As an  example, landfill has traditionally been the responsibility of local govern - ments as the least desirable form of disposal because of the production 4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   74 and release of methane, which contributes immensely to climate change  . Governments advocating for establishing a circular econ - omy view landfill as a source of missed economic opportunities for indus - try that can benefit from waste where ‘the value of products, materials  and resources is maintained in the economy for as long as possible’  . In Kingdon’s  MSF analysis, ideas contribute to the construc - tion of the issues and problems that enter the policy agenda. When policy - makers frame a problem, it can dictate how it will be treated. Ideational  processes help provide the explanation for a dynamic approach to policy  change, in which change, or continuity, is possible through ideas and dis - cursive interaction in politics . Ideas have a role in  helping to shape the policy agenda. How a problem is framed will deter - mine who is invited to participate in the policy process by government.  Whether waste is framed in economic or environmental terms will also  influence which stakeholders seek to contribute to influencing the policy  change. For example, how a government frames waste as a problem will  shape the way it will be examined and the potential solutions pursued.  Theoretically, the focus of waste prevention policy should be on weaken - ing the relationship between cause  and effect (genera - tion of waste), rather than the drivers behind waste generation. Framing  can help to convince policymakers, interest groups and the general popu - lation that policy action is necessary . Barr et al.   argue that, as many environmental concerns become increasingly framed  within a climate change agenda, ‘waste’ retains an important place as a  visible illustration of the overconsumption that scholars and practitioners  alike have blamed for contributing to a long-term environmental crisis  . According to Beland , ideas  about the most pressing issues of the day help actors to narrow down the  list of issues on the policy agenda. Ideas contribute to the construction of  the social, economic and environmental problems that political actors may  address . Agenda setting is about a government recognising that a problem is a  ‘public’ problem worthy of attention. It is often considered the most criti - cal stage in the policy process, as governments can only address a limited  number of public problems at any particular time .  There is more likelihood of policy change if an issue reaches the govern - ment’s policy agenda. The main actors involved in agenda setting com - monly emerge from a collective of actors such as interest groups, religious  S. M. JONES 75 groups, industry representatives, unions, associations and think tanks.  Elections provide opportunities for these actors to pressure political par - ties to commit to act on their issues. Focus is on a problem that needs  attention and the policy actions that can be taken to resolve it places  demand for action by government. Peretz  argued for the impor - tance of defining the policy problem in the first instance. ‘Correct problem  definition is paramount, as it guides the agenda building process: It directly  influences the alternatives debated, the political willingness to advocate a  change, and the policy that emerges’ . For Rochefort  and Cobb , a problem’s dimensions guide the agenda building pro - cess. They suggest that difficulty in accurately assessing a problem’s sever - ity and likely consequences has plagued environmental decision-making,  as has difficulty in distinguishing between a mere problem and a crisis.  Solutions can often shape the action taken by policymakers. Policymakers  will be more inclined to act on a problem if a solution is thought to be  available, acceptable and affordable, hence the economic framing.  Deciding what an issue is all about and how serious a problem is can lead  to conflict; moreover, policy problems are matters of interpretation.  Nevertheless, it is crucial that these problems be interpreted correctly.  Interpretation directly influences the alternatives debated, the political  willingness to advocate change and the policy that emerges. 4.3.4   Problem Characteristics The final dimension of the framework involves how the characteristics of  the problem shape policy priority. The framework suggests three key char - acteristics that contribute to whether decision-makers decide if policy  change is necessary; indicators show policy action is needed, severity of an  issue calls for a policy response and policy intervention can be shown to  produce the necessary change. Some issues are easier to manage, for exam - ple comparatively straightforward issues where policy action can be mea - sured and progress reported . Shiffman and  Smith  argue that problems that cause substantial harm will be  treated as more serious by policymakers. Similarly, problems that policy - makers can address effectively and cheaply, for example investment in vac - cines to improve children’s health, will more likely receive political  attention . Kingdon  identifies ‘problem’ as one of the three  ‘streams’ in his MSF approach. He argues that governments have a long  list of problems that they could attend to and that decision-makers pay 4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   76 attention to some problems and ignore others. ‘Sometimes their attention  is affected by more or less a systemic indicator of a problem. At other  times, a dramatic event seizes their attention, or feedback from the opera - tion of existing programmes suggests all is not well’ . The establishment of indicators relating to environmental sustainabil - ity has been a global issue with international commitments. Indicators of  relevance to the transition to a circular economy, including the state-of- the- envir onment indicators established by the UN, help to monitor prog - ress against the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals , including  goals of direct relevance to a circular economy: Goal 11, namely  Sustainable Cities and Communities, and Goal 12, namely Responsible  Consumption and Production. These indicators have been tested in  actual policy processes  and often supported  with institutional and policy arrangements such as cross-jurisdictional  committees and councils or units within government institutions. Most  recent reports by the UN show that indicators are revealing that, while  there has been some progress, it is not at sufficient speed to realise the  SDGs by 2030 . Individual countries are required to measure  progress against the indicators and make policy change where necessary  to achieve the overall SDGs. Scholars argue that for indicators to be effec - tive in contributing to policy change, they need to be perceived simulta - neously—consensually—by a group of policy actors as being legitimate,  credible and salient . Importantly, the level of the policy  actors’ perceptions influences the usability of indicators and their subjec - tive judgement of the indicator’s qualities. The usability and quality of  indicators is thus a matter of subjective judgement at the level of the  policy actors themselves . An example of the need to establish usable indicators that have the  support of policymakers is the European Commission  Circular  Economy Monitoring Framework . The  Monitoring Framework is a set of indicators that cover the different  phases of the circular economy. These circular indicators can be used by  member countries ‘to show if the existing policy initiatives are successful  in delivering the expected results’ and/or to identify ‘areas where more  action is needed’ . The indicators include elements of waste  management as well as innovation and economic growth, which, some  argue, ‘highlights the attempt to mainstream waste management into  economic narratives’ . Concerns were raised by  member countries that that the indicators tend to be skewed towards  S. M. JONES 77 waste management–related information at the expense of other phases of  the circular economy such as production, consumption, reuse and repair,  thereby missing out on some important transformation trends and eco - nomic opportunities. The EU argues that there is an ‘absence of available  data or even methodologies to measure these aspects’ (European  Commission 2018 , 5). As a result, for the foreseeable future it is ‘neces - sary to work with other available information that may give some more  indirect indications of performance’ . The focus on waste manage - ment by the EU will continue to be supported by the availability of the  indicators that measure progress. Without the indicators to support other  circular economy objectives, there will be long-term implications for the  policy change needed for a transition to a circular economy and the estab - lishment of more sustainable use of resources will remain challenging. This dimension of the framework also points to the severity of a policy  problem prompting policy change. In the case of the circular economy,  the crisis relating to recycling practices in many OECD countries has cre - ated a situation where governments have been forced to respond.  Interestingly, in some cases indicators in countries such as Australia,  Canada, the US and the UK had been suggesting the existence of prob - lems in the recycling industry since the 1990s but governments avoided  responding to the issues until they became so severe that political priority  for policy change became urgent .  As a result, the focus on waste management as a key ‘problem’ for the  transition to a circular economy has been driven by the calls for govern - ment action to respond to the crisis situation. Dominating debates about  the circular economy revolves around the burden of managing growing  volumes of waste and the ‘waste as resource’ paradigm to support the idea  that economic opportunities are being missed as a result of current prac - tices . What should be done about managing waste  has become the central problem rather than how to prevent waste in the  first place. The MSF suggests that any given policy problem has an  improved chance of rising in the policy agenda as a political priority if  coupled with another pressing pre-existing problem . The  combination of a crisis situation, coupled with the problem of missed eco - nomic opportunities, has reinforced the need for a policy response. These  arguments contribute to the framing of waste as an economic problem  that warrants a joint government and industry response. Since the 1990s,  a shift from an environmental to economic focus helps to reinforce waste  as an issue of resource management which can be measured with 4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   78 reportable results in terms of rates of recycling or transformed into alter - native products or energy produced . The  reportable results of jobs created and money generated have become  attractive stories for policymakers and are used to demonstrate effective  approaches to dealing with the issue and help to justify the effectiveness of  government intervention. In the third aspect of this dimension of the framework, policymakers  may recognise an opportunity for according issues a higher policy priority  on the basis of evidence that government intervention may be successful  and in keeping with political objectives. In terms of circular economy,  government plans and strategies, where they exist, may outline govern - ment involvement in promoting the development of waste industry. This  intervention can involve direct participation, for example building and  operating waste facilities, usually the domain of municipal governments.  Other levels of government may provide incentives if evidence suggests  that this will encourage private sector investment. Arguably, in linking this  policy response requiring evidence to the severity issue, the recycling crisis  has prompted this form of action in some countries. Governments are able  to provide evidence based on market failure arguments when politically  expedient to support such interventions, citing government and industry  reports that support making the issues a policy priority. Such actions are  easy to explain, simple to implement and relatively inexpensive, and inter - vention can be justified in terms of both economic and environmental  outcomes. A recent report produced through the European Union’s  Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme suggests the popu - larity of these actions are largely as a result of the circular economy being  a nexus policy, because it is an attempt to reconcile economic interests  with environmental concerns . Pressure from industry also supports the view that more recycling is  good. Many stakeholders support these arguments on the basis of the  potential growth of the recycling industry and for the underlying assump - tion that nothing else needs to change in terms of other circular economy  objectives, for example reducing consumer spending, if products can be  recycled. Government can provide data that reveals industry employment  opportunities, annual revenues generated for every tonne of waste that is  recycled, and the number of new jobs created . These fig - ures are attractive as governments also view waste as a potential source of  revenue. Thus, recycling becomes attractive for both industry and con - sumers. Similarly, the evidence supporting ‘waste to energy’ projects  S. M. JONES 79 focuses on the savings made in terms of reduced need for landfill and the  potential to replace fossil fuels as an energy source . Such  interventions are relatively easy for governments as they only need to iden - tify incentives for the private sector to invest in these forms of waste man - agement. Different stakeholders within the business, NGOs and  government sectors are likely to have divergent views and evidence. In  these circumstances, government actors play a major role in the ‘issue  naming, blaming, claiming and framing; either formally through their  contacts with societal actors, or informally through their influence over  the media, think tanks or academia’ . Viewing waste  as an industry implies that waste diversion is the preferred solution to the  problem of managing increasing volumes of waste, which benefits vested  interests seeking to expand economic opportunities in recycling, landfill  and energy . Ignoring consumption curtails  the capacity of waste prevention plans to prevent the generation of waste. 4.4  polIcy chAnge Once political priority is recognised, policy change should be facilitated  through the policy process. This too has its own challenges and has been  the focus of a long history of research. The analysis of the policy process is  largely based in Easton’s systems theory  of the stages approach.  According to this view, political systems consist of inputs, demands from  individuals and groups for governments to act, and supports largely voting  and obedience to laws and the payment of taxes .  These inputs pass through a conversion stage to produce outputs and out - comes in the form of decisions and policies. A feedback loop forms the last  stage where the outputs of the process shape future inputs to the system  . The stages’ approach provides a series of points of analysis that  have contributed to a large body of policy analysis literature that recog - nises the complex and elaborate nature of policymaking. Wu et al. ( 2010 ,  7) argue that policy activities do not occur in a linear progression; they are  ‘discrete, albeit interrelated, sets of activities that public managers can  engage in to achieve society’s and governments policy goals’. The formulation of policy involves the identification of a possible course  of action governments can take to address the problems on the agenda.  Options need to be politically acceptable, administratively feasible and  technically sound. Wu et al.  argue that policymakers are most often  pressured to choose options that are deficient, only marginally different 4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   80 from existing policies or to take no action at all. Many governments estab - lish guidelines for their policymakers when formulating public policy;  these often clarify that the government executives remain firmly in con - trol. Here is an example from Northern Ireland that places policymaking  in the context of the obligations of elected government: Policy-making is the process by which governments translate their political  vision into programmes and actions to deliver ‘outcomes’—desired change  in the real world.  is about establishing what needs to be done—examin - ing the underlying rationale for and effectiveness of policies—then working  out how to do it and reviewing on an ongoing basis how well the desired  outcomes are being delivered.   Definitions such as this reflect political expediency (government’s  vision) with some deference to due process .  Policy formulation involves key actors in the policy process, including the  political executives, individual legislators and senior officials of the key  government agencies involved with the issue or problem. One essential  part of the formulation stage is the policy design, which includes planning  of the implementation stage . This implies that once pol - icy priority is decided, policymakers decide which tools and instruments  they intend to use and what financial and human resources they should  allocate. Translating these visions and plans into achievable policies consti - tutes one of the greatest challenges in policymaking and is a strong indica - tor of the level of priority the problem has reached for the government.  Policymakers have to decide which combination of policy instruments can  best be deployed to influence the content and effect of policy action to  address a problem and implement a solution. OECD evidence highlights  the importance of regulatory policy and governance to ensure that regula - tions meet the desired objectives and new challenges as efficiently as pos - sible . As a reflection of political priority for waste  management, governments tend to establish regulatory instruments that  set rules to govern waste streams, require authorisation for treatment facil - ities and set standards for their operation according to best available tech - niques. In addition, several countries have introduced landfills bans to  promote recycling and recovery. Some OECD countries have also used  economic instruments such as landfill and incineration taxes, which can  promote recycling and reduce landfilling. Full cost recovery for municipal  waste services is in place in some OECD countries but remains to be  addressed in others . S. M. JONES 81 Governments need to decide to ‘take a course of action   to deal with the policy problem ‘. Following the for - mulation of possible courses of action, governments make the decision on  which option to take. Scholars recognise that decisions are made follow - ing consideration, and a small number of options and that politics plays a  major role in the process. The definition of decision-making established  by Brewer and DeLeon  provides some insights on this  process: It is the most overtly political stage in so far as the many potential solutions  to a given problem must somehow be winnowed down and but one or a  select few picked and readied for use. Obviously most possible choices will  not be realized and deciding not to take particular course of action as much  a part of selection as finally setting on the best course. Evaluation is a critical element of the implementation of policy as it  involves the assessment of whether original objectives have been achieved. A  willingness to undertake a comprehensive evaluation of a policy or pro - gramme reflects political priority to ensure policy change. Rutter   argues that ‘real change will come when politicians see evidence and evalu - ation as ways of helping them entrench policies.’ The results and recom - mendations of evaluation can be introduced to new stages of policymaking  and, depending on political priority, can contribute to the refinement of  policy design or to the termination of a programme .  Accurate data is needed to improve the policy base for policy development,  implementation and evaluation. Several Environmental Performance  Reviews  conducted by the OECD identified a need for better data collection  and quality assurance and the use of good-quality indicators showing the  need for policy change. In many countries, data sets are not complete.  Inconsistencies in definitions and data collection methods make comparison  across countries difficult. Effective information systems are a key tool for  policy action. Wu et al., warn that policy evaluation is also a political process  that can be used to ‘disguise or conceal’  the results of policy  action. Evaluations can be used for political purposes to prevent critique and  lead to preferred conclusions. For example, some governments rely on  poor-quality data on recycling, largely provided by the packaging industry,  to suggest that there is limited recognition for increasing the political prior - ity for policy intervention . NGOs can also undertake their  own evaluations that help to reveal poor performance when governments  are attempting to use selected data for political advantage ABC 2019 ).4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   82 4.5  conclus Ion Policy action to transition from a linear to a circular economy model  requires the commitment of political leaders to prioritise the mobilisation  of official institutions and wider policy systems into resourcing regulatory  interventions commensurate with social, economic and environmental  challenges. The prime focus of most government policy has been on recy - cling and reducing resource loss. Research shows mixed results due to  varying levels of political commitment to deal with the challenges and bar - riers to reform. Commitments to develop and implement effective waste  management policies, including prevention, will contribute to establishing  the circular economy objectives of environmentally sustainable practices of  consumption and the effective management of waste. Equitable and sus - tainable responses will require a strong role for government (Keskitalo  et al. 2016 ). The following chapters will examine two case examples of the  governments of Belgium and Norway that have given a degree of policy  priority to aspects of the circular economy. Their examples will be consid - ered in the context of the issues discussed in this chapter. Of critical impor - tance is their experience and the lessons they provide for other governments  in multilevel systems contemplating, according to these issues, a higher  policy priority by adopting regulatory approaches to help ensure a stronger  policy response for the commitments made to circular objectives. reFerences Abboud, L. . Can we break our addiction to plastic? The future of packag - ing. Financial Times . Retrieved from https://www.ft.com/content/27cf9734-   faa7-  11e9-  98fd-  4d6c20050229 ABC 2019. Recycling industry demands federal action as mountains of rubbish  build up. Online: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-04-14/recycling-   industry-demands-federal-action-as--waste-piles-up/10993218 Baker, P., Gill, T., Friel, S., Carey, G., & Kay, A. . Generating political prior - ity for regulatory interventions targeting obesity prevention: An Australian case  study. Social Science & Medicine, 177 , 141–149. Barr, S., Guilbert, S., Metcalfe, A., Riley, M., Robinson, G. M., & Tudor,  T. L. . Beyond recycling: An integrated approach for understanding  municipal waste management. Applied Geography, 39 , 67–77. Bauler, T. . An analytical framework to discuss the usability of (environ - mental) indicators for policy. Ecological Indicators, 17 , 38–45. Baumgartner, F. R., & Jones, B. D. . Agendas and instability in American  politics . University of Chicago Press. S. M. JONES 83 Bell, S. . Institutionalism. In A. Parkin, J. Summers, & D. F. Woodward  , Government, politics, power and policy in Australia  .  Melbourne: Pearson Australia Group. Béland, D. . Ideas, institutions, and policy change. Journal of European  Public Policy, 16 , 701–718. Bertolini, M., Colacino, P., Delnevo, N., & Petroni, A. . Stakeholders’  influence and internal championing of product stewardship in the Italian food  packaging industry. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on  Product Lifecycle Management . Brewer, G. D., & DeLeon, P. . The foundations of policy analysis.  Dorsey Press. Bodin, Ö. . Collaborative environmental governance: Achieving collective  action in social-ecological systems. Science , 357, p.eaan1114. Borrelle, S. B., Rochman, C. M., Liboiron, M., Bond, A. L., Lusher, A., Bradshaw,  H., & Provencher, J. F. . Opinion: Why we need an international agree - ment on marine plastic pollution. Proceedings of the National Academy of  Sciences, 114 , 9994–9997. Boteler, C. . Recycle across America: Standardisation, not education, can fix  contamination. Retrieved from https://www.wastedive.com/news/ recycling-  across-  america-  standardization-  education-  contamination/517865/ Bulkeley, H. . Cities and the governing of climate change. Annual Review  of Environment and Resources, 35 , 229–253. Bulkeley, H., & Gregson, N. . Crossing the threshold: Municipal waste  policy and household waste generation. Environment and Planning A: Economy  and Space, 41 , 929–945. Cairney, P. . The role of ideas in policy transfer: The case of UK smoking  bans since devolution. Journal of European Public Policy, 16 , 471–488. Carter, N., & Jacobs, M. . Explaining radical policy change: The case of  climate change and energy policy under the British labour government  2006–10. Public Administration, 92 , 125–141. Clapp, J. . The rising tide against plastic waste: Unpacking industry attempts  to influence the debate. In S. Foote & E. Mazzolini , Histories of the  dustheap: Waste, material cultures, social justice  . MIT Press. Clode, D. 2018. Plastic’s damage too conveniently ignored. The Australian.  Review. October 13–14. Cohen, M. D., March, J. G., & Olsen, J. P. . A garbage can model of orga - nizational choice. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17 , 1–25. Dauvergne, P. . The shadows of consumption: Consequences for the global envi - ronment . MIT Press. Dauvergne, P. . Why is the global governance of plastic failing the oceans?  Global Environmental Change, 51 , 22–31.4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   84 DEFRA . Sustainable Consumption and Production – Development of an  Evidence Base: Study of Ecological Footprinting, Final Report prepared for  Defra Ref: CTHS0401, RPA June 2005. Online: http://www.defra.gov.uk/ environment/business/scp/methodology.htm De Jesus, A., & Mendonça, S. . Lost in transition? Drivers and barriers in  the eco-innovation road to the circular economy. Ecological Economics,  145, 75–89. Dechezleprêtre, A., & Sato, M. . The impacts of environmental regulations  on competitiveness. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,  11, 183–206. Denters, B., & Klok, P. J. . Citizen democracy and the responsiveness of  councillors: The effects of democratic institutionalisation on the role orienta - tions and role behaviour of councillors. Local Government Studies,  39, 661–680. Department of Environment and Energy . . Discussion Paper.  Updating the National Waste Policy: Less waste, more resources. Online:  http://www.environment.gov.au/protection/national-waste-policy/ consultation-on-updating-national-waste-policy . Dewan, T., & Spirling, A. . Strategic opposition and government cohesion  in Westminster democracies. American Political Science Review , 337–358. Dijkema, G. P. J., Reuter, M. A., & Verhoef, E. V. . A new paradigm for  waste management. Waste Management, 20 , 633–638. Durose, C., & Richardson, L. . Designing public policy for co-production:  Theory, practice and change . Bristol, England: Policy Press. EEA. . Recycling municipal waste. Retrieved from https://www.eea. europa.eu/airs/2018/resource-  efficiency-  and-  low-  carbon-  economy/ recycling-  of- municipal-  waste EPA . . Basic information about landfill  gas. Retrieved from https://www.epa.gov/lmop/basic-  information-  about-    landfill-  gas European Commission. . COMMISSION STAFF WORKING  DOCUMENT Measuring progress towards circular economy in the European  Union—Key indicators for a monitoring framework Accompanying the docu - ment COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE  EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPE (No. SWD   17). Retrieved from https://eur-  lex.europa.eu/legal-  content/EN/ TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52018SC0017&from=EN European Parliament. . Circular economy: More recycling of household  waste, less landfilling. Retrieved from https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/ en/press-  room/20180411IPR01518/circular-  economy-  more-  recycling-  of-   household-  waste-  less- landfilling S. M. JONES 85 Falkner, R. . Business power and conflict in international environmental  politics . London: Springer. Gentil, E. C., Gallo, D., & Christensen, T. H. . Environmental evaluation  of municipal waste prevention. Waste Management, 31 , 2371–2379. Giampietro, M., Kovacic, Z., Strand, R., & Völker, T. . Report on narra - tives behind the circular economy concept. MAGIC   Project Deliverable 5.7, Revision. Retrieved from https://magic-  nexus.eu/ sites/default/files/files_documents_repository/magic_deliverable-  5.7_revi - sion_24.06.2019.pdf Gregson, N., & Crang, M. . From waste to resource: The trade in wastes  and global recycling economies. Annual Review of Environment and Resources,  40, 151–176. Greyl, L., Vegni, S., Natalicchio, M., Cure, S., & Ferretti, J. . The waste  crisis in Campania, Italy. In J.  M. Alier , Ecological economics from the  ground up  . Routledge. Head, B.  W. . Assessing network-based collaborations: Effectiveness for  whom? Public Management Review, 10 , 733–749. Hey, C. . The German Paradox: Climate leader and green car laggard. In  S.  Oberthur & M.  Pallemaerts , New climate policies of the European  Union . Brussels: Brussels University Press. Hezri, A. A., & Dovers, S. R. . Sustainability indicators, policy and gover - nance: Issues for ecological economics. Ecological Economics, 60 , 86–99. Hill, M. . The public policy process  . Sydney: Longman. HM Government. . Securing the future: Delivering UK sustainable develop - ment strategy . Norwich: The Stationery Office. Hook, L., & Reed, J. . Why the World’s recycling system stopped working.  Financial Times . Retrieved from https://www.ft.com/ content/360e2524-  d71a-  11e8-  a854-  33d6f82e62f8 Hoffman, A. J., & Ventresca, M. J. . The institutional framing of policy  debates: Economics versus the environment. American Behavioral Scientist,  42, 1368–1392. Horwitch, M., & Mulloth, B. . The interlinking of entrepreneurs, grass - roots movements, public policy and hubs of innovation: The rise of Cleantech  in New York City. The Journal of High Technology Management Research,  21, 23–30. Howlett, M. . Governance modes, policy regimes and operational plans: A  multi-level nested model of policy instrument choice and policy design. Policy  Sciences, 42 , 73–89. Howlett, M., & Ramesh, M. . Studying public policy: Policy cycles and policy  subsystems . Oxford: Oxford University Press. Institute for Government 2011. Policy making in the real world: Evidence and  Analysis. Online: https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/policy4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   86 Johansson, N., & Corvellec, H. . Waste policies gone soft: An analysis of  European and Swedish waste prevention plans. Waste Management,  77, 322–332. John, P. . Theories of policy change and variation reconsidered: A prospec - tus for the political economy of public policy. Policy Science, 51 , 1–16. Kangas, O., Niemelä, M., & Varjonen, S. . When and why do ideas matter?  The influence of framing on opinion formation and policy change. European  Political Science Review, 6 , 73–92. Kay, A., & Baker, P. . What can causal process tracing offer to policy stud - ies? A review of the literature. Policy Studies Journal, 43 , 1–21. Kaza, S., Yao, L., Bhada-Tata, P., & Van Woerden, F. . What a waste 2.0: A  global snapshot of solid waste management to 2050 . World Bank Publications. Keskitalo, E. C. H., Juhola, S., Baron, N., Fyhn, H., & Klein, J. .  Implementing local climate change adaptation and mitigation actions: The role  of various policy instruments in a multi-level governance context.  Climate, 4 , 7. Kingdon, J. W. . Agendas, alternatives, and public policies  . NY:  Harper Collins. Lazarevic, D., & Valve, H. . Narrating expectations for the circular econ - omy: Towards a common and contested European transition. Energy Research  & Social Science, 31 , 60–69. Lovan, W.  R., Murray, M., & Shaffer, R. . Participatory governance:  Planning, conflict mediation and public decision-making in civil society .  Routledge. McBeth, M. K., Shanahan, E. A., Arnell, R. J., & Hathaway, P. L. . The  intersection of narrative policy analysis and policy change theory. Policy Studies  Journal, 35 , 87–108. Meijerink, S. . Understanding policy stability and change. The interplay of  advocacy coalitions and epistemic communities, windows of opportunity, and  Dutch coastal flooding policy 1945–2003. Journal of European Public Policy,  12, 1060–1077. Mintrom, M., & Vergari, S. . Advocacy coalitions, policy entrepreneurs,  and policy change. Policy Studies Journal, 24 , 420–434. Mintrom, M., & Norman, P. . Policy entrepreneurship and policy change.  Policy Studies Journal, 37 , 649–667. OECD. . Strategic waste prevention . OECD reference manual. ENV/ EPOC/PPC 5/FINAL. OECD. . Policy framework on sound public governance. Online: https:// www.oecd.org/governance/policy-framework-on-sound-public-governance/ OECD. . Waste management and the circular economy in selected OECD  countries: Evidence from environmental performance reviews.  OECD environ - S. M. JONES 87 mental performance reviews. Paris: OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/1 0.1787/9789264309395-  en Peretz, J. H. . Waste management agenda setting: A case of incorrect prob - lem definition? Waste Management & Research, 16 , 202–209. Pickin, J. 2018. Developing the national waste report . Waste Management Review.  http://wastemanagementreview.com.au/developing_national_waste_report/ Pollitt, C., & Dan, S. . The impacts of the New Public Management in  Europe: A meta-analysis. COCOPS.  European Commission, European  Research Area. Rochefort, D. A., & Cobb, R. W. . Problem definition, agenda access, and  policy choice. Policy Studies Journal, 21 , 56–71. Rosenzweig, C., Solecki, W. D., Blake, R., Bowman, M., Faris, C., Gornitz, V., et  al. . Developing coastal adaptation to climate change in the New York  City infrastructure-shed: Process, approach, tools, and strategies. Climatic  Change, 106 , 93–127. Rutter, J. . Evidence and evaluation in policy making. London: Institute for  Government . Retrieved from https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/ sites/default/files/publications/evidence%20and%20evaluation%20in%20 template_final_0.pdf Sabatier, P. A. . An advocacy coalition framework of policy change and the  role of policy-oriented learning therein. Policy Sciences, 21 , 129–168. Seyfang, G., & Smith, A. . Grassroots innovations for sustainable develop - ment: Towards a new research and policy agenda. Environmental Politics,  16, 584–603. Shiffman, J., & Smith, S. . Generation of political priority for global health  initiatives: A framework and case study of maternal mortality. The Lancet,  370, 1370–1379. Simões, P., & Marques, R. C. . Influence of regulation on the productivity  of waste utilities. What can we learn with the Portuguese experience? Waste  Management, 32 , 1266–1275. Simon, N. . We need a global treaty on plastics: Here’s what it should look  like, August 9. Retrieved from https://ensia.com/voices/ we- needa-  global-  treaty-  on- plastics-  heres-  what-  it- should-  look-  like Smith, A., & Seyfang, G. . Constructing grassroots innovations for sustain - ability. Global Environmental Change, 23 , 827–829. Smith, J. A. . The idea brokers: Think tanks and the rise of the new policy elite .  New York, NY: The Free Press. Sterner, T., Barbier, E. B., Bateman, I., van den Bijgaart, I., Crépin, A. S.,  Edenhofer, O., et al. . Policy design for the Anthropocene. Nature  Sustainability, 2 , 14–21. Tierney, J. . Recycling is garbage. New York Times . Retrieved from https:// www.nytimes.com/1996/06/30/magazine/recycling-  is- garbage.html4 THE CHALLENGE OF POLITICAL PRIORITY   88 UN. . Progress has been made, but ‘not at a sufficient speed to realize the  SDGs’: UN ECOSOC President. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/sus- tainabledevelopment/blog/2018/07/progress-  has- been-  made-  but- not-   at- a- sufficient-  speed-  to- realize-  the- sdgs-  un- ecosoc-  president-  2/ UNFCC. . Waste to Energy: Summary and conclusions from the IEA  Bioenergy ExCo71 Workshop. Retrieved from https://unfccc.int/sites/ default/files/resource/Waste%20to%20energy%202.pdf Van Dooren, W., Bouckaert, G., & Halligan, J. . Performance management  in the public sector . Oxford, UK: Routledge. van Vonno, C. M. . Achieving party unity in the Netherlands: Representatives’  sequential decision-making mechanisms at three levels of Dutch government.  Party Politics, 25 , 664–678. Walgrave, S., & Varone, F. . Punctuated equilibrium and agenda-setting:  Bringing parties back in: Policy change after the Dutroux crisis in Belgium.  Governance, 21 , 365–395. Wikström, F., Williams, H., Verghese, K., & Clune, S. . The influence of  packaging attributes on consumer behaviour in food-packaging life cycle assess - ment studies-a neglected topic. Journal of Cleaner Production, 73 , 100–108. Wu, X., Ramesh, M., Howlett, M., & Fritzen, S.  A. . The public policy  primer: Managing the policy process . London: Routledge. WWF. . The state of Australia’s recycling—How did we get into this mess?  Retrieved from https://www.wwf.org.au/news/blogs/the-  state-  of- australias-   recycling-  how-  did- we- get- into- this- mess#gs.kerd3t S. M. JONES 89 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7_5CHAPTER 5 Waste Management in Belgium Abstract  This chapter adopts the political priority framework as a tool for  analysing the policy ef fort undertaken in Belgium to establish a circular  economy. Of particular relevance is the implementation of sustainable  approaches to waste management. The contribution of the multilevel  nature of the Belgian political system is highlighted in discussing  approaches to policy development and implementation. Challenges and  opportunities for the adoption of further aspects of the circular model  beyond recycling are also discussed. Keywords  Belgium • Flanders • Br ussels • Wallonia • Circular  economy • Waste management 5.1  Introduct Ion Since the mid-1980s, Belgian governments have developed well-organised  waste management systems based on the circular economy principles of  reduce, reuse and recycle. Federal and regional legislation supports, policy  instruments, governance arrangements, funding, sanctions, planning and  data collection. After years of experimentation and review of waste man - agement practices, Belgium now has some of the highest rates of recycling  in the European Union  . As a result of the waste  prevention and diversion strategies, the Belgian region of Flanders has  90 some of the most effective waste prevention results in Europe .  Belgium, as a whole, met the 2020 EU recycling target in 2003 (EEA  2013 ). The transformation of Belgian waste management systems has  been the result of a top-down strategic approach by regional governments  in order to meet and often go beyond EU requirements. For Belgium’s  11.5 million citizens, the system places considerable responsibility on both  households and industry by establishing a high level of sorting and reuse,  a collection system based on maximum source separation; a landfill ban for  household waste; direct charging of householders for waste disposal; sig - nificant use of home composting; producer responsibility schemes for  household packaging and other wastes; and legislated limitations on  incineration. 5.2  Waste Manage Ment In BelgIuM 5.2.1   Policy Context Belgium is a federal state comprising thr ee regions (Wallonia, Flanders and  Brussels-Capital); waste management is a matter for the regions. Brussels  Capital Region represents 9% of the municipal waste generated in Belgium,  Flanders 60% and Wallonia 31% . The Belgian state is the legal  entity responsible for compliance with EU legislative requirements for  waste. Regional governments are not subordinate to the federal level and  are within their constitutional right to deal directly with the EU on waste  issues. As in the 2008 European Waste Framework Directive, waste is  defined by the three regional governments as any substance or object  which the holder discards. Belgian regions have implemented the EU pro - visions relating to by-products and end of waste status. As an example, the  Materials Decree of 2011 , on the prevention and management of waste  substances, lays the foundation of a coordinated and permanent waste  policy in Flanders. Through a series of amendments, the decree evolved  gradually from final removal or destruction of waste to prevention and  useful application. VLAREA ( Flemish Regulation concerning Waste  Prevention and Management , 1998) implements the Waste Decree. The  Implementation Plan for Environmentally Responsible Household Waste  Management   established the general guidelines for Flemish  municipalities for the prevention, separate collection and treatment of  household waste. The updated version  provides local  councils S. M. JONES 91 with ideas and tools to collaborate with the residents, associations, and com - panies from your municipality, to achieve more waste prevention and re-use,  a better source-separated collection and recycling, and less litter. In this  manner, we will jointly work together towards a beautiful and material-   conscious Flanders showing in Eur ope at the top regarding its waste policy.   In Belgium there has been a tendency by governments to streamline  waste legislation into one code in terms of inspection, prevention, deter - mination and sanctioning of environmental issues. For example, the coop - erative agreement between the three regions and the packaging sector was  established in 1994 for recovering and recycling the packaging waste. The  current version of the Cooperation Agreement of 04-11-2008 on the preven - tion and management of packaging waste   argues: it is essential for all parties involved in the production, use, import and dis - tribution of packaged goods to become more aware of the significance of  packaging in generating waste, and whereas these parties assume responsi - bility for such waste according to the ‘polluter pays principle’.   This Agreement is based on mandatory stewardship requirements for  packaging waste throughout Belgium, where packagers, importers and  those who sell packaging and packaged products bear responsibility for  reuse and recycling of packaging waste. The Agreement is applicable to  the disposal and treatment of both household and industrial/commercial  packaging waste. In reflecting its multilevel character, each Belgian region has its own  ministry with responsibility for environmental issues, including waste  management. Competencies for environmental issues are exclusive to the  regional governments. No federal authority has precedence over the  regions exercise of environmental powers. The introduction of circular  economy initiatives focused on waste and recycling by the EU has been  reflected by each of the governments of Belgium. The Belgian govern - ment introduced 21 measures towards establishing a circular economy in  2016 , Flanders introduced the ‘Circular Flanders:  Together towards a circular economy Kick-off Statement ,  Wallonia introduced its ‘Strategy for the deployment of circular economy  in 2020  and Brussels City introduced the Brussels Capital 5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   92 region circular economy strategy in 2016 . By dividing  responsibility between intergovernmental agencies, municipal govern - ments and industry, regional governments have implemented strategies  for circular initiatives for waste prevention, recycling and composting.  Importantly, this has not prevented regions forming joint arrangements  for mutual activities and country-wide focus to achieve common goals.  Recognition of the benefits of coordination and cooperation have been  drivers of an interregional agreement on waste reduction and recycling.  Regional governments have each established autonomous agencies with  specific responsibility for waste policy. In Flanders, Belgium’s largest  region, the government established the Flemish Public Waste Agency   as the competent authority for solid waste established covering  waste management and prevention; see Fig.  5.1. OVAM’s main task is to  prepare waste management legislation on behalf of the Flemish minister  responsible for the environment. Once the legislation is approved by the  Flemish government, OVAM supervises and coordinates the implementa - tion of waste management across the region. OVAM is also responsible for  waste management planning. OVAM positions itself as an organisation for  active environmental management that prefers dialogue to build partner - ships and to reach a consensus with its target audience, so that mutual  support and capacity is created for a sustainable environment’ (OVAM  2019a ). Much of the work of OVAM, including results, is reasonably well  Fig. 5.1  Competent authority for waste management in Flanders (Sour ce:  Author; derived from OVAM 2019b ) S. M. JONES 93 documented and publicly available and forms the basis of this case study.  Where possible, reference is also made to activities in the other regions  and to interregional initiatives. All data regarding waste production and waste treatment in Flanders are  collected at the central databases of OVAM; it uses the data to set perfor - mance targets and provides investment subsidies to municipalities and  inter-municipal associations for waste prevention, separation and treat - ment. In 2019, there were 308 Flemish municipalities, responsible for  municipal solid waste; almost all of them have grouped themselves into  associations to provide these services collectively. Municipalities are respon - sible for implementing the UMBHA and the Separate Collection of  Industrial Waste from Small Enterprises  plan as required by OVAM. UMBHA  establishes the general guidelines for the prevention, separate collection  and treatment of household waste. OVAM sets targets and signs agree - ments with municipalities regarding source separated collected waste,  residual waste, bulky waste, and street and sweeping waste, litter and waste  from street dustbins. Municipalities are also required to deal with industrial  waste similar to household waste, that is, waste from businesses of a nature,  composition and quantity similar to household waste . The obligations for municipalities include conducting waste prevention  campaigns, provide technical or financial assistance to citizens to reduce  waste, sponsor specific campaigns for target groups like schools and so on.  This has been done by way of inter-municipal cooperation since the  mid- 1970s, wher eby a group of municipalities merge their waste manage - ment activities within one single organisation or inter-municipal partner - ship. A few cases of mixed inter-municipal partnerships also exist, which  include the participation of a private company. Fifty per cent of household  waste collection in Flanders is also outsourced to private waste companies.  Agreements between municipalities and OVAM often include subsidies to  finance public education campaigns as well as home compost programmes  and school education programmes. Despite efforts to produce consistent  national approaches, ongoing historical differences for recycling rates for  municipal waste exist between Brussels Capital Region, Flanders and  Wallonia. Recycling rates for material and organic recycling are highest in  Flanders throughout the period 2001–2010, whereas Wallonia has made  most progress . Low performance in the capital is explained  by the lack of infrastructure for the treatment of organic waste and ‘lack of  collection/recycling infrastructure related to the high urban density’  .5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   94 5.2.2   Ideas and Appr oaches Taken During the 1990s, there was a high level of resistance and opposition by  part of the Flemish population to landfilling and incineration of waste.  Belgian regions have some of the highest population densities in the EU  . Identifying locations for new landfill and incineration  options created a situation of strong opposition from local residents (R4R  2014 ). In the context of European environmental agendas at the time,  this made waste an important target of eco-modernisation and infrastruc - ture investment . Lack of options in Belgian regional areas  created a situation of rising costs for the collection and treatment of the  municipal solid waste, and municipalities were forced to find new ways to  finance those costs. In responding to this policy window, the Flemish gov - ernment recognised that the establishment of both a ban on landfill and a  landfill tax marked the beginning of a transition to new ideas to waste  management at the regional level. The banning of landfill along with strict  limitations on incineration by the three regions placed added responsibil - ity for municipalities to align their restrictions. The main objective has  been around environmental ideas to reduce the amount of waste going to  landfill, to limit greenhouse gas emissions and risks of soil contamination,  while pushing the recycling or composting of wastes. According to OVAM,  the incineration ban has been adopted in order to provide a counterbal - ance to the landfill ban by ensuring that incineration does not become the  only way of dealing with waste and that efforts in waste prevention and  recycling still get continuous support . In addition to waste prevention strategies, Flemish municipalities have  introduced ‘Pay As You Throw’  requirements at the household  level. By the mid-2000s, these schemes were being introduced in other  countries including the United States, in large metropolitan areas such as  San Francisco, Seattle and San Jose . In the Flanders  model, the most expensive aspects focused on the collection of residual  waste, followed by the collection of the household biodegradable waste  , with lowest taxes applied to plastic  bottles, metal packaging and drink cartons . The separate collec - tion of paper and cardboard, container glass and textiles would be free. The idea behind PAYT is to stimulate citizens to take some responsibil - ity and sort their waste correctly into different recyclable waste streams by  making waste sorting financially more attractive. Elements of PAYT vary  S. M. JONES 95 among inter-municipality associations. Some charge for bags that cover  the costs of collection while others use bins with electronic chips that  charge according to the volume or weight of the waste. For larger contain - ers, there is taxation per volume and per pick up. In this way, more waste  could be reused, recycled or composted with less waste going to final  treatment . The aim has evolved with the goal to  recycle as much as possible waste materials in accordance with the Materials  Decree 2011  after being used by the households and to produce less resid - ual waste. Tax on other waste streams varies depending the quantity. The  use of the landfill tax had a significant effect on the reduction of the land - filling rate and did not affect significantly the incineration rate; the landfill  tax has been a driver for diverting waste from landfilling directly to recy - cling . OVAM has established financial incentives for the purchase of second-   hand goods as stated in the Flemish waste pr evention programmes. Belgium  introduced a reduced VAT rate applicable to reused products, 6% rather  than the usual 21% for new products. The tax differentiation is mainly justi - fied by social reasons, but it also supports the redistribution, repair and  refurbishment of used products that can then compete more easily with  new products. Research shows that taxes are effective in improving rates of  recycling but do little to reduce consumption . The  combination of PAYT schemes with incentives to support waste prevention  plans, and tax regulations and more targeted actions at the local level, such  as awareness-raising campaigns, reuse initiatives, secondhand markets,  repair cafes, support reuse and promote lower levels of consumption. The  high reuse rates in Flanders underline the effects of an integrated approach  to support reuse with appropriate economic instruments .  OVAM provides subsidies to support municipalities construction and man - agement of waste drop-off centres and compost plants, implement PAYT  systems, and other activities. In Flanders, the municipalities are subsidised  for implementing the PAYT principle. The municipalities are subsidised for  containers including a weighing system for door-to-  door collection of   residual or biodegradable household waste. Also, civic amenity sites are  subsidised. Local authorities can build their facilities in a way they can  charge the citizens depending on the quantity and type of waste they  deposit. Flemish subsidies since the 1990s have supported the infrastruc - ture necessary for the separate collection of the MSW at source, for exam - ple civic amenity sites and composting facilities. OVAM also conducts 5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   96 regular education campaigns for citizens and industry that reinforce the  message that ‘leaving behind waste is socially unacceptable’ . OVAM regards enforcement as the cornerstone of any policy. Sanctions  ‘must be visibly clear out in the field that no form of litter and illegal  dumping will be accepted anymore’ . Enforcement has  been interpreted in broad terms: not only fines can be imposed; munici - palities can also challenge violators concerning their behaviour and increas - ing social control. Sanctions for non-compliance are stringently applied in  other regions. For example, in the Bruxelles Capital Region fines up to  €625 for non-compliance were introduced in 2010. Fines are in place for  a range of failures to comply, including taking rubbish bags outside of the  authorised collection days/times, and non-sorted or non-compliant bags.  In addition, the local government in Brussels has a range of criminal sanc - tions enforced through the Bruxelles-Propreté. Officers with powers of  investigation similar to those of the police, and sometimes even larger,  ensure compliance. Prosecutions are heard before a Magistrate’s court, or  refer the case to Bruxelles-Propreté, which can impose administrative  fines. Administrative fines can reach €62,500. Their amount is set by a  Decree on the investigation, detection, prosecution and punishment of  offences relating to the environment. 5.2.3   Policy Actors The association of all municipalities and cities in Flanders  has a  focus on achieving the SDGs. It r epresents their interests to central gov - ernment and negotiates sustainability issues on their behalf and with rec - ognised bodies of producers with producer responsibility obligations.  OVAM is the Public Waste Management Agency in Flanders which coop - erates with municipalities. OVAM coordinates this cooperation, represent - ing Flemish municipalities and intermunicipal waste management  organisations in negotiations with administration, cabinet officials and  industry. In a short time, OVAM has become a prominent stakeholder on  municipal solid waste management for the regional government and offi - cial departments. Through the household waste implementation plan, OVAM expects  that between 2016 and 2020 Flemish municipalities will reduce the total  quantity of residual waste from households, companies and organisations.  It will do this by imposing various targets of residual waste for each cluster  S. M. JONES 97 of municipalities. The implementation plan imposes new targets for waste  prevention, reuse, litter, illegal dumping and industrial waste in Flanders.  OVAM recognises the contextual pressure placed on municipalities regard - ing waste management. With the implementation plan, municipalities are  encouraged to customise their approach to suit local circumstances.  Targets for reducing household waste have been ‘tailor-made’ to suit  socio-  economic cir cumstances of individual municipalities. For example,  coastal municipalities are assigned a less stringent target since they produce  more residual waste due to tourism than rural municipalities . The cooperative packaging Agreement is administered by the  Interregional Packaging Commission , which undertakes  supervision and advisory roles to each regional waste authority, including  OVAM. The IVC-CIE has contracted Fost Plus to coordinate with pack - aging manufacturers to collect and process packaging from households,  and Val-I-Pac has been contracted to process industrial and commercial  packaging waste. These organisations are membership based and work  together with packaging manufacturers to achieve the government recy - cling targets. Fost Plus was established in 1994 as voluntary initiative of  private sector organisations. Companies that bring packaged household  products onto the Belgian market join up with Fost Plus and pay an annual  contribution based on the quantity and type of their packaging. Fost Plus  uses this contribution to collect, sort and recycle the packaging after use.  In addition to these contributions, Fost Plus also generates income from  the sale of the materials collected and uses the revenue for continuous  education campaigns for citizens regarding correct sorting rules (R4R  2014 ). The revenues from the sale of collected materials, together with  the member contributions, must cover all the collecting and sorting costs  . Members include major packaging firms such as  Unilever, Coca Cola, Carrefour, Total, Proctor and Gamble and Danone  . Participating companies pay a fee based on the type and  amount of packaging they are responsible for introducing into the market.  The organisation funds the public collection, sorting, and recycling of  these materials. This programme covers the entire nation and is moni - tored. In 2016, household packaging was processed by Fost Plus in  Belgium  or in Belgium, with 24.1% processed in neighbouring  countries  and 1.5% in the rest of  Europe. Only a very limited amount  was processed outside Europe  .5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   98 5.2.4   Ef fective Policy Action? Waste management in Belgium seems to be proving effective. While there  may be differences between the regions in terms of objectives and  approaches taken, the overall results as reported by the EU   show that Belgium is well above the European average for recycling and  well below average for landfilling). In its 2018 report, the IVCE-CIE  detailed recycling and recovery figures and the monitoring of reusable  packaging throughout Belgium. The recycling and recovery results for  2017 for household packaging waste were 80% for recycling and 2.7% for  incineration for energy recovery, with the residual being sent to landfill.  . Val-I-Pac achieved a recycling rate by its members of  88.8% for plastic, paper/cardboard, metal and wood, against a target of  80%. Recycling by industry has been improved through the policy support  for reusable packaging. The implementation of landfill bans and limita - tions on incineration supported by tax incentives and financial sanctions  for non-compliance contribute to Belgium being the best overall perfor - mance across the EU in waste treatment . These aspects of  the Flemish policy and the scale of the Flemish contribution to the overall  result make Flanders the leading contributor to the Belgian recy - cling scores. The trend from 2003 to 2017 shows improvement in the reuse of  materials, particularly wood; see Fig.  5.2. The implementation of the  incineration bans has also been successful; these bans have reduced  Flanders’ dependency on incineration of residual waste compared to 15  years ago; from 36% in 1991, the share of incineration is now just 25% and  seems to have been stable since 2002. For household waste, the combination of PAYT and incentives focused  on reuse has contributed to a reduction in per capita household residual  waste; see Fig.  5.3. This continues to be a focus for the government and  OVAM as their data suggests that further reductions will need to be made  to reduce landfill and incineration rates even further. The IVC-CIE has set new objectives for recycling: by 2022, at least  90% of beverage packaging waste must be collected and recycled and, by  2025, at least 95% of household packaging waste. Val-I-Pac has been set  the objective of reducing residual waste (the material that cannot be recy - cled) from companies away from landfill, or from export. Belgian regional  governments argue that they uphold the ‘proximity and self-  sufficiency  principle’ and want as much residual waste as possible to be incinerated in  S. M. JONES 99 Table 5.1  Waste Treatment in the EU, % of total, 2016  Recovery Disposal Recycling Backfilling Energy  recoveryLandfill and  otherIncineration without  energy recovery EU-28 37.8 9.9 5.6 45.7 1.0 Belgium 76.9 0.0 12.6 6.4 4.1 Bulgaria 5.2 0.0 0.4 94.4 0.0 Czechia 49.5 29.0 4.5 16.6 0.4 Denmark 51.4 0.0 19.5 29.1 0.0 Germany 42.7 26.6 11.3 18.1 1.2 Estonia 21.6 11.2 2.5 64.7 0.0 Ireland 10.6 46.0 4.8 38.4 0.3 Greece 4.8 0.0 0.3 94.8 0.0 Spain 37.1 5.7 3.6 53.6 0.0 France 55.0 10.3 5.4 27.6 1.6 Croatia 47.2 4.0 1.0 47.8 0.0 Italy 78.9 0.1 4.0 14.2 2.7 Cyprus 10.4 28.0 3.8 57.8 0.0 Latvia 71.7 1.1 6.8 20.3 0.0 Lithuania 33.4 4.1 5.8 56.6 0.0 Luxembourg 34.8 24.2 2.1 39.0 0.0 Hungary 54.1 3.7 7.4 34.2 0.6 Malta 19.1 63.4 0.0 17.2 0.4 Netherlands 45.6 0.0 7.6 46.0 0.9 Austria 37.0 11.0 : 45.9 : Poland 46.2 22.2 3.3 28.0 0.4 Portugal 43.5 9.5 12.1 34.7 0.2 Romania 4.0 0.4 1.4 94.1 0.1 Slovenia 60.2 27.2 4.8 6.9 0.8 Slovakia 40.0 4.7 7.0 47.8 0.5 Finland 7.4 0.0 4.5 88.0 0.0 Sweden 12.0 4.9 6.6 76.3 0.2 United  Kingdom48.5 7.8 3.4 37.5 2.7 Iceland 25.0 51.0 0.4 22.3 1.3 Norway 43.5 2.6 34.0 19.5 0.5 Montenegro 0.8 0.0 0.2 98.9 0.0 Serbia 2.8 0.8 0.2 96.3 0.0 Turkey 33.0 0.0 0.8 0.2 Kosovoa0.0 0.0 0.0 100.0 0.0 Source : Eurostat  aThis designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and  the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo Declaration of Independence5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   100 Wood0500,0001,000,0001,500,0002,000,0002,500,0003,000,0003,500,000TONNE 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Metal Plastic Total Fig. 5.2  Trend in reusable packaging, all Val-I-Pac members 2003–2017 (IVC-   CIE 2018a ) Total household waste19900100200kg per captia300400500600 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 Residual waste Selectively collected waste74331405423450480491 491527 531544560 558 555 535 537554 555545 543531521 524513502491 468 330 334 335325 280 258 216 202191180169160 159157 153 153 149 149 148145 141150 150155 93116145166211269315342368378386 375395 388383399390382372 374364 355345 326 Fig. 5.3  Trends in residual waste Flanders 1990–2015  S. M. JONES 101 Belgium. The overall approach fits within the circular economy agenda as  its aim is to ‘preserve as many rare and valuable packaging materials as pos - sible in order to reuse them as raw materials in industrial production’  . Important indicators relating to the circular economy include the rela - tive strength of the recycling industry. Data suggests that the OVAM sup - port for developing a domestic capacity for recycling has been effective.  Belgium’s exposure to the consequences of China’s National Sword policy  has been tempered by the waste management practices established under  the intergovernmental Agreement. Fost Plus figures show that 99% of  package recycling takes place in Belgium or a neighbouring country (see  Fig. 5.4), thus reducing exposure to the bans placed by South East Asian  countries. OVAM  argues that companies in Flanders involved in the plastic  recycling value chain indicate that they perceive China’s restrictions on the  import of waste materials introduced in 2018 is generally seen in a positive  light as it creates potential opportunities for more activities and invest - ments in Europe and Flanders. OVAM, however, recognised that China’s  decision resulted in a temporary oversupply of plastic waste on the Belgian  market, with a corresponding price reduction. It warned that Belgian recy - clers could face difficulties with respect to marketing their recycled prod - ucts since there is currently only a limited amount of applications for  recycled plastic. As such, OVAM considered the option of regulations to  promote the use of recycled plastic or government subsidies to overcome  the uncertainties which can limit possible investments . 3.1% France4.9% Germany13.5% The Netherlands0.3% Europe other0.2% Outside Europe 78.1% BelgiumFig. 5.4  Recycling of  packaging location (Fost  Plus 2017 )5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   102 Despite the dedicated programmes, municipal waste management in  Belgium shows a low overall recycling rate for Brussels . Also,  more recent data sets  show a recycling rate of 27% for  Brussels, while the average Belgian performance was 54% in 2013. In EEA  , the low performance is explained by the lack of infrastructure for  the treatment of organic waste and lack of collection/recycling infrastruc - ture related to the high urban density . Apart from its  objectives on waste prevention and recycling, Flanders wants to maintain  its comparatively strong performance by reducing household consump - tion even further. When compared with other EU countries, Belgium per - forms very well in reducing per capita waste at the household. This is a  challenging area that requires continual awareness campaigns and a focus  on changing behaviour. While household waste in the EU grew at an aver - age of 3.4% per annum over the 1995–2017 period, Belgium reduced its  household consumption by 9.9%. OVAM recognises the limitations of  separated collection, recycling, and treatment of waste. The current view  of OVAM is that it is better to prevent waste generation and to reuse  goods. Through the new implementation plan, OVAM, in combination  with municipalities will attempt to decouple consumption from waste gen - eration. This is important as the Flanders region produced an average of  around 522 kg of household waste per capita in 2012, 2013 and 2014,  well above the Belgian and EU averages. The current aim in Flanders is to  reduce per capita waste to less than 502  kg by 2022   . 5.3  challenges  and opportun ItIes The aim of this case study has been to draw attention to some of the chal - lenges faced by governments in a multilevel system from developing and  implementing consistent waste management policies that contribute to  the transition from a linear to a circular economy. Belgian regional gov - ernments have largely been effective in establishing coordinated waste  management policies that reflect many of the circular principles. They  have been comparatively successful in recycling waste as they have been  willing to apply a suite of policy instruments that include compulsory  requirements and financial incentives to encourage behaviour change.  Legislated stewardship requirements for packaging producers have also  contributed to high levels of recycling both household waste and business  S. M. JONES 103 Table 5.2  Municipal waste generated in selected years, 1995–2017 (kg per cap - ita)  1995 2000 2005 2011 2017 Change 2017/1995  EU-28 470 521 515 497 486 3.4 Belgium 455 471 482 453 410 −9.9 Bulgaria 694 612 588 508 435 −37.3 Czechia 302 335 289 320 344 13.9 Denmark 521 664 736 781 781 49.9 Germany 623 642 565 626 633 1.6 Estonia 371 453 433 301 390 5.1 Ireland 512 599 731 616 : : Greece 303 412 442 503 504 66.3 Spain 505 653 588 485 462 −8.5 France 475 514 529 534 514 8.2 Croatia : 262 336 384 416 : Italy 454 509 546 529 489 7.7 Cyprus 595 628 688 672 637 7.1 Latvia 264 271 320 350 438 65.9 Lithuania 426 365 387 442 455 6.8 Luxembourg 587 654 672 666 607 3.4 Hungary 460 446 461 382 385 −16.3 Malta 387 533 623 589 604 56.1 Netherlands 539 598 599 568 513 −4.8 Austria 437 580 575 573 570 30.4 Poland 285 320 319 319 315 10.5 Portugal 352 457 452 490 487 38.4 Romania 342 355 383 259 272 −20.5 Slovenia 596 513 494 415 471 −21.0 Slovakia 295 254 273 311 378 28.1 Finland 413 502 478 505 510 23.5 Sweden 386 428 477 449 452 17.1 United Kingdom 498 577 581 491 468 −6.0 Iceland 426 462 516 495 656 54.0 Norway 624 613 426 485 748 19.9 Switzerland 600 656 661 689 706 17.7 Montenegro : : : 524 : : North Macedonia : : : 357 344 : Albania : : : : 436 : Serbia : : : 375 306 : Turkey 441 465 458 416 425 −3.6 Bosnia and Herzegovina : : : 340 352 : Kosovoa: : : : 228 : Source : Eurostat  aThis designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244/1999 and  the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence5 WASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   104 waste. In addition, the Belgian experience shows that it is very important  that such instruments be supported by a system of levies. The case study has focused particularly on the experience of the Flanders  region as it appears to have taken waste policy action as a political priority  over time. For Flanders, the waste management policy encompasses tar - gets for environmental improvement, economic growth and social devel - opment, all of which are in harmony with circular principles. The  government of Flanders also wants to uncouple the production of waste  from increasing consumption. Since 2010, Flanders, through OVAM, has  continued to set ambitious per capita waste reduction targets. This objec - tive remains unchanged even in the context of social and economic changes  that are seeing increasing numbers of smaller households, increasing con - sumption and the reduction of the average life cycle of products, and it  increases the production of waste materials . Each of the Belgian regional governments focused on recycling with  strong application of separation provisions required of households and  business. The application of PAYT to waste has been a common element  of waste policy to support recycling in the three regions. Research shows  that the implementation of PAYT schemes, along with the development of  appropriate infrastructure and awareness raising, helps to achieve some of  the demanding objectives of the circular economy (Morlok et al. 2017 ,  14). In Flanders, results have shown that, while implementing a landfill  ban on its own can be effective, it needs to be used in conjunction with an  incineration ban so that the fundamental aspects of the waste hierarchy are  supported. The more materials that remain in the material cycle, the more  likely it is that waste policy can make a contribution to the circular econ - omy. Research also shows that PAYT schemes do not necessarily have an  effect on the long-term total amount of waste generated and managed by  a country . To date Flanders appears to have recog - nised this by taking steps in recent years to support higher levels of reuse  of materials. The experience of other countries is that more effective  approaches require other policies developed at the national or the regional  level, for example product policies, waste prevention plans and tax regula - tions, and more targeted actions at the local level, such as awareness-   raising campaigns, r euse initiatives, second-hand markets and repair cafes  . The experience of the Belgian regions highlights some weak spots pre - venting a more comprehensive transition from a linear to a circular econ - omy in a multilevel system. Belgian waste management agencies have  S. M. JONES 105 demonstrated effective collection methods, but they are yet to develop  systems that process recycled material to the same levels of competence.  Exporting recycled material to other European countries for processing  remains the main practice. There are also some inconsistent approaches by  each region in different aspects that show the challenge of taking policy  action to preventing the growth of waste through reducing consumption.  Action in this area is a cornerstone of the circular economy as it prevents  the use of raw materials entering the waste cycle; however, there appears  to be a lack of commitment by governments to challenge consumption as  a policy priority. A circular economy necessitates redesigning material life  cycles to reduce the volume of materials used. This is a difficult area for  government action. There is a tension between promoting economic  growth and taking the, seemingly counterintuitive, action to change  behaviour and lower levels of consumption. Decades of learned consump - tion based on linear approaches will require policy priority to establish  long-term effective policy measures previously off limits to governments  in market-based economies. Belgium has the highest net financial wealth by households in the EU  . During the global financial crisis from 2008 to 2013,  Belgian private consumption still recorded an average annual growth rate  of about 1%, well above the average pace that was observed in the three  main neighbouring countries. Research suggests that as a country becomes  richer, the composition of its waste changes. With more money comes  more packaging, imports, electronic waste and broken toys and appliances  . The Waste Framework Directive   obliges EU member states to adopt and implement waste prevention pro - grammes. The revised Waste Framework Directive  strengthens  this requirement but does not introduce binding quantified targets for  waste prevention. A review of available programmes indicates that coun - tries use a broad range of measures with a focus on information-based  instruments and, to a lesser extent, regulatory and economic instruments.  Common elements of government policy action include taking an overt  focus on end-of-pipe actions lower  options, with no specific mea - sures for reducing the overarching material use . The ‘arms-length’ agencies in Belgium, such as those focused on waste  policy, tend to have high levels of policy autonomy vis-à-vis the minister   . These agencies have been estab - lished to help promote coordination and cooperation between regional  approaches. The agencies declare that they are able to choose their 5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   106 preferred target groups and policy instruments. In the case of OVAM, it  can develop and implement legislation focused on waste management for  the Flanders region. The IVC-CIE has responsibility to formulate propos - als and advice for the regional governments on amending the joint agree - ment . The experience of the IVC-CIE reveals that  cooperation is not impossible if regional governments are committed to a  joint approach. This has often proven to be challenging in the Belgian  federation where the central government does not have the constitutional  responsibility to take the lead in bringing the regional governments  together to a common integrated approach. While recycling of plastic packaging has achieved a common approach,  challenges remain in other critical areas of waste. As an example, the  Flanders Environment Agency Report  reveals the current linear  approaches to food production and industry resistance to drastic change.  In spite of the pressure exerted on the system by sustainability issues, soci - etal developments and emerging niches, there appears to be no real sense  of urgency for structural changes. The regime of conventional agriculture,  food industry and retail focus primarily on the preservation of existing  organisations, structures and institutions, and on transformation based on  technologically supported ecological modernisation. Again, the experi - ence of Flanders is leading the way on this. In Flanders, 92% of all food  waste is reused within the food system: 43% is used as animal feed, 44% as  material—generally as soil improver or fertiliser, with or without prior  composting or fermentation—and 5% is used for energy applications. Only  6% is incinerated  and about 1% is landfilled or dis - charged . Research has indicated that agencies in Belgium tend to be more inno - vative and customer oriented than their administrative counterparts, espe - cially if there is sufficient autonomy and result control (Verhoest et  al.  2012 ). Research by Campbell-Johnston et al.  suggests that multi - level policy integration is needed to alter value chains to enable greater  reduction in material inputs and changes in actor behaviour towards a  transitions to a circular economy. Whether Belgian waste management  agencies can take coordinated policy action on the more challenging cir - cular aspects, such as reducing consumption, without pushback from  political and business interests, remains to be seen. S. M. JONES 107 references Belgium. . Ensemble faisons tourner l’économie en développant l’économie  circulaire en Belgique (Let’s make the economy work by developing the circu - lar economy in Belgium). Retrieved from https://www.belgium.be/en/econ- omy/sustainable_development/sustainable_economy/innovative_   economic_models/circular_economy . Brussels. . Brussels capital region circular economy strategy . Retrieved from  http://www.circulareconomy.brussels/a-  propos/?lang=en . Campbell-Johnston, K., ten Cate, J., Elfering-Petrovic, M., & Gupta, J. .  City level circular transitions: Barriers and limits in Amsterdam, Utrecht and  The Hague. Journal of cleaner production, 235 , 1232–1239. Chepkemoi, J. . European countries by population density. World Atlas .  Retrieved from https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/european-  countries-  by-  population-  density.html . EEA. . Waste prevention in Europe-policies and trends in reuse in 2017 .  Retrieved from https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/waste-  prevention-    in- europe-  2017 . EEA . . Municipal waste in Belgium .  Retrieved from https://www.eea.europa.eu›publications›managing-  municipal-    solid-  waste . EURELCO. . Country reports—Flanders: Landfilling practices and regula - tions in Flanders  . Retrieved from https://eurelco.org/wp-  content/ uploads/2018/09/f593b3_6741bf99d43943ffbfadc4ceca6e7ded.pdf . European Union .  .  Directive  2018/851 of the European  Parliament and of the Council. Amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste.   Online:  https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CEL EX:32018L0851&from=EN Eurostat. . Packaging waste statistics. Online: https://ec.europa.eu/euro- stat/statistics-explained/index.php/Packaging_waste_statistics . Eurostat. . Municipal waste statistics . Retrieved from https://ec.europa. eu/eurostat/statistics-  explained/index.php?title=Municipal_waste_   statistics#Municipal_waste_generation . Eurostat. . Recycling rates for packaging waste . Retrieved from https:// ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/ten00063/default/table?lang=en . Flanders Environment Agency. . Environmental outlook 2018 . Retrieved  from https://en.vmm.be/publications/environmental-  outlook-  2018-    solutions-  for- a- sustainable-  future . Fost Plus. . Annual report 2016: Packaging management for a world on the  move: Evolution or revolution? Brussels, Belgium. Fost Plus. . Annual report 2017: A new impulse for the management of  household packaging waste. Brussels, Belgium.5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   108 Hoornweg, D., Bhada-Tata, P., & Kennedy, C. . Environment: Waste pro - duction must peak this century. Nature News, 502 , 615. IVC-CIE. . Activity report 2018 . Retrieved from https://www.ivcie.be/ wp- content/uploads/2019/07/Activity-  Report-  2018-  IRPC_web.pdf . IVC-CIE. . Cooperation agreement of 04-11-2008 on the prevention and  management of packaging waste . Retrieved from https://www.ivcie.be/en/ . Milios, L. . Advancing to a circular economy: Three essential ingredients  for a comprehensive policy mix. Sustainability Science, 13 , 861–878. Minne, G., Basselier, R., & Langenus, G. . Why has Belgian private  consumption growth been so moderate in recent years? National Bank of  Belgium: Economic Review . Retrieved from https://www.nbb.be/doc/ts/ publications/economicreview/2019/ecorevi2019_h3.pdf . Morlok, J., Schoenberger, H., Styles, D., Galvez-Martos, J. L., & Zeschmar-Lahl,  B. . The impact of pay-as-you-throw schemes on municipal solid waste  management: The exemplar case of the county of Aschaffenburg, Germany.  Resources, 6 , 1–16. OVAM. . Activities report 2016: Together we make tomorrow more beau - tiful. Mechelen, Belgium. OVAM. . Circular Flanders: Together towards a circular economy. Kick-   off statement. Retrieved from https://vlaanderen-  circulair.be/src/Frontend/ Files/userfiles/files/Circular%20Flanders%20Kick-  Off%20Statement.pdf . OVAM. . Implementation plan for household waste and comparable indus - trial waste—Summary.  Retrieved from https://www.ovam.be/sites/default/ files/atoms/files/UitvoeringsplanHuishoudelijkenGelijkaardigBedrijfsafval_ LR_2017_Engelstalig.pdf . OVAM. . Exploration of the plastic recycling landscape in Flanders . Retrieved  from https://vlaanderen-  circulair.be/en/summa-  ce- centre/publications/ exploration-  of- the- plastic-  recycling-  landscape-  in- flanders . OVAM. . Circular Flanders. Our projects. Retrieved from https:// vlaanderen-  circulair.be/en/our-  projects . OVAM. . Mission statement . Retrieved from http://toep.ovam.be/jahia/ Jahia/pid/1219?lang=en . R4R . . Good practice Flanders: PAYT . Retrieved  from https://www.regions4recycling.eu/upload/public/Good-  Practices/ GP_OVAM_PAYT.pdf . Savini, F. . The economy that runs on waste: Accumulation in the circular  city. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 21 , 675–691. Verhoest, K., Demuzere, S., & Rommel, J. . Belgium and it’s regions. In  K. Verhoest, S. Van Thiel, G. Bouckaert, & P. Laegreid , Government  agencies: Practices and lessons from 30 countries  . London: Palgrave  Macmillan. S. M. JONES 109 Verschuere, B. . The autonomy—Control balance in Flemish arm’s length  public agencies. Public Management Review, 9 , 107–133. Wallonia. . Circular Wallonia: la Wallonie se dote d’une stratégie ambitieuse  de déploiement de l’économie circulaire. Retrieved from https://borsus.wall- onie.be/home/presse%2D%2Dactualites/publications/circular-   wallonia%2D%2D-  la- wallonie-  se- dote-  dune-  strategie-  ambitieuse-  de-  deploiement-  de- leconomie-  circulaire.publicationfull.html . Wright, C., Halstead, J. M., & Huang, J. C. . Estimating treatment effects  of unit-based pricing of household solid waste disposal. Agricultural and  Resource Economics Review, 48 , 21–43. Zeller, V., Towa, E., Degrez, M., & Achten, W. M. . Urban waste flows and  their potential for a circular economy model at city-region level. Waste  Management, 83 , 83–94.5 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN BELGIUM   111 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7_6CHAPTER 6 Waste Management in Norway Abstract  This chapter adopts the political priority framework as a tool for  analysing the policy ef fort undertaken in Norway to establish a circular  economy. Of particular relevance is the implementation of sustainable  approaches to waste management. The contribution of the multilevel  nature of the Norwegian political system is highlighted in discussing  approaches to policy development and implementation. Challenges and  opportunities for the adoption of further aspects of the circular model  beyond recycling are also discussed. Keywords  Norway • Recycling • Municipalities • Competitiveness •  Circular economy 6.1  Introduct Ion Waste management in Norway is characterised by complexities and chal - lenges that reveal a need for according these issues a higher policy priority  support towards more sustainable approaches. There has been a focus on  exporting recycled material rather than the development of a local recy - cling industry capable of accommodating the volumes of waste produced  . Rising volumes of hazardous waste are derived from con - sumer goods such as computers and mobile phones . Reports  by Statistics Norway show that waste volumes have continued to increase  112 since 2012. While waste from manufacturing has slowly decreased, waste  from households has shown no sign of reducing (SSB 2017 , 2018a ,  2019b ). The Norwegian Environment Agency sees affluence as a prime  driver of increasing volumes of household waste . Studies  reveal that waste prevention at the household level has a long history of  failure in the Norwegian context . Despite government  commitments and statements of support to EU circular initiatives, Norway  has no clear policy or strategy on establishing more sustainable approaches  nor a single responsible ministry. The various aspects of circular economy  are addressed as appropriate by several ministries under their individual  areas of responsibility . A lack of strong legislative support at  the national level for industry compliance and uncoordinated governance  arrangements at the ministerial level, combined with inconsistent  approaches at the municipal level, continue to provide challenges in this  key area of supporting sustainability focused policy initiatives in the man - agement of waste. The 2017b  White Paper, Waste as resource—Waste policy and circular  economy , outlines the Norwegian government’s proposals to meet EU  2008 Waste Framework Directive, including requirements under the EU  2015 Circular Economy Package . The primary purpose of  the White Paper was to contribute to the establishment of a government  strategy that would promote resource efficiency as the core of a circular  economy. The focus is on initiatives for the reduction of food loss, support  for recycling and a strategy for plastics, with a priority on microplastics and  marine littering. There is also a requirement for implementing the  European Commission’s waste regulations, particularly more ambitious  targets for recycling municipal waste. Questions have been raised regard - ing the level of commitment the Norwegian government has to achieving  many of the waste-related targets and whether there is any serious inten - tion to establish a circular economy. The White Paper has been criticised  for not developing specific indicators or other measurement tools for  determining progress towards circular approaches. In this regard the  International Solid Waste Association claims that the Norwegian approach  ‘leaves a lot to be desired’ . While there have been strong  results in Norway’s recycling of plastic bottles and cans, there have been  ongoing challenges in reducing consumption to prevent the continuing  growth in volumes of waste. S. M. JONES 113 6.2  Waste Manage Ment In norWay 6.2.1   Policy Context Norway is a constitutional monarchy, with legislative power vested in its  unicameral parliament . The Parliament’s 169 members are  directly elected by a system of proportional representation for four-year  terms. It is led by a presidium consisting of a president and five vice presi - dents. In 2020, the parliament of Norway consisted of minor parties rang - ing from conservative, centre right/left, green and Christian Democrats.  Since 2019, the Right Party, the Progressive Party, the Left party and the  Christian People’s Party have reached an agreement to establish a majority  government. At the committee level there are opportunities for political  parties to participate in the decisions that help determine government  policy. The Standing Committee for Energy and the Environment has an  interest in the circular economy and waste management; it has 17 mem - bers, with representation from each of eight political parties (Stortinget  2020 ). There is general agreement in the Stortinget: The government’s political cooperation platform says that Norway should  be a pioneer in developing a green, circular economy that makes better use  of resources, and that a national strategy on circular economy should be  prepared.  Although not a member of the EU, Norwegian approaches to waste  comply with the EU Waste Framework Directive. As a member of the  European Economic Area  Agreement, Norway is also a member of  the European Free Trade Association  and needs to conform with  the EU policies on waste management if it is to continue to benefit from  EU subsidies and trade. As a result, Norwegian environmental policy has  been strongly influenced by the EU. Norway has also often influenced EU  environmental policy, and in some areas has adopted requirements more  stringent than those of the EU. Norway has shared values and high degree  of integration with EU environmental initiatives. It is in Norway’s eco - nomic interest in promoting European competitiveness and high standards  for the protection of the environment. As a high-level influence, substantial  aspects of the legislation proposed in the European Commission’s European   Green Deal  to promote waste-focused initiatives associated with a circular  economy will fall within the scope of the EEA. Norway is very active in the 6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   114 bureaucracy of the EU and sees itself making a contribution to the develop - ment of these initiatives . In terms of institutional settings, the Norwegian government develops  national waste policy, establishing the general framework for stakeholders  with adherence to EU commitments. Municipalities and industry share  responsibility for local waste collection and treatment solutions. Important  waste policy instruments include legislation, taxes and economic incen - tives targeted at the municipalities, business and industry. There is consid - erable variation in approaches to waste management between municipalities  based on population, resources and local conditions. Municipalities are  sovereign legal entities, and national policy initiatives are proposed more  as expectations than regulated requirements. The Norwegian Association  of Local and Regional Authorities states that municipalities have connec - tions with the EU that ‘require both legal and political connections’ (KS  2020 ). The EEA is one area where municipal governments see opportuni - ties to influence EU affairs. Compliance with national objectives is moni - tored by national environmental authorities and county governors; the  process entails problem identification and resolution, along with follow-  up super vision through relevant ministries. Similar to other areas of envi - ronment policy in Norway, waste regulation resides with the Ministry of  the Climate and the Environment; however, the laws that mandate actual  measures are enforced by a number of other authorities subsumed under  several ministries . This feature of policy implemen - tation can contribute to challenges for coordination and the measurement  of results. Complicating the scenario is the fact that inter-municipal com - panies represent the most common approach to collection and processing  of waste with the majority of municipalities cooperating to organise their  waste services. The largest industry group is Avfall Norge, a trade associa - tion for waste management and recycling companies in Norway. Avfall  Norge membership includes 100 municipal and inter-municipal solid  waste organisations, and covers about 95% of Norway’s municipalities  . Approximately 28 municipalities run waste services  in-house; some support competitive tendering, resulting in out-of-   municipality pr ovision, either by public companies from other municipali - ties or private companies . Waste  management is one of the municipal services with the highest degree of  variation in organisational forms, both public and private, delivering  Norwegian public services. The Norwegian government relies on a variety of policy measures to  provide incentives for waste prevention, including relying on extended  S. M. JONES 115 producer responsibility  arrangements for business and encouraging  changes to consumer behaviour. Waste prevention activities tend to focus  on selected types of waste, including food waste, waste from building and  construction, electric and electronic waste, and textiles. Measures for  waste prevention are assessed on where prevention will have the greatest  environmental effects throughout the life cycle of each product and where  there will be the largest potential for economic benefit of the measures  . The first unified Norwegian legislation concerning pollution and waste  was the Pollution Control Act  of 1981 . Waste treatments have traditionally  involved recycling and incineration; for example, in 1991 Norway intro - duced a recovery target for 80% of municipal waste. In 1999, landfill and  incineration taxes were introduced. By 2015, the tax was abolished as  administrative costs were greater than the revenue generated. In 2009, a  landfill ban for biodegradable waste was introduced for paper, tree and  food waste. The incineration tax was terminated in 2010 largely due to the  fact that Sweden had already abolished its incineration tax—creating a  market in which Norwegian incineration plants were uncompetitive. As a  result, almost all of the municipal solid waste  (and waste in gen - eral) exported from Norway goes to Sweden and almost exclusively to  incinerate in waste-to-energy  plants for district heating. Detailed  statistics are difficult to obtain but it is estimated that 1.6 million tonnes  of MSW are exported every five years. The topic is complex, and lower  processing costs in Sweden  are considered  the main reason for the MSW exports . In an ironic twist,  Norway has recently been importing around 400,000 tonnes waste per  year for the emerging Norwegian WtE plants in particular, mainly refuse-   derived fuel  fr om the UK . The Norwegian government recognises a need for a greater focus on  waste prevention especially for food waste, construction and industrial  waste, electrical products and textiles. Scholars argue that Norwegian gov - ernment initiatives are relatively weak as they aim to a small degree at  directly preventing waste . The Nordic Council  of Ministers has argued that Norway needs to identify and develop cost-   effective prevention solutions—not least to meet the targets of the 2018  EU Directives on waste . In its most recent  report, the NEA states: ‘From 2014 to 2015 waste rose by 3 %, while  GDP increased by 2 %, as a result the national target for waste prevention  was not achieved’ .6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   116 6.2.2   Ideas and Appr oaches Taken In an attempt to focus waste policies in the direction of circular initiatives,  the Norwegian government released the Strategy for Green Competitiveness   in 2017  . This strategy contains basic ideas and  principles emerging from the 2017 White Paper that forms the basis of its  core aspects, including the circular economy as one contribution to green  competitiveness. The strategy is a key milestone for the Norwegian gov - ernment and for the waste and recycling industry because it regards the  sector as a catalyst for moving towards a circular economy. The govern - ment claims it will promote a transition to sustainable practices through a  set of four waste-related initiatives:  1. Seek to str engthen markets for secondary raw material.  2. Further develop environmentally sound use of waste  3. Increase recycling rates  4. Strengthen demand for circular economy solutions through coop - eration with the EU labelling schemes to encourage green con - sumption . The minister for climate and environment has suggested that Norway  recognises the importance of waste policy as it can reflect many circular  principles: ‘waste is no longer first and foremost a problem—it is also a  resource. Almost everything we consider as waste can be reused or recov - ered. Recycling and measures to reduce waste are important elements in  our waste policies’ . The Norwegian government relies on regulatory measures established  under the Pollution Control Act  and assorted Waste Regulations , as the  means of achieving its waste management goals .  A key objective of the strategy is to promote access to and production of  high-quality secondary raw materials using financial incentives to encour - age business uptake. The government is proposing a requirement that  business should draw up clear criteria for secondary raw materials and  communicate them to manufacturers. For its part the government will  take steps to strengthen the market for secondary raw materials in coop - eration with the manufacturing and waste management sectors. These  ideas reflect the proposals made in the White Paper and the Strategy that  reflect the Norwegian government’s tendency to avoid setting specific  S. M. JONES 117 targets for broad-scale recycling and separation of waste and take serious  steps to increase useful and environmentally sound use of waste and waste-   based pr oducts . There is some recognition within  government that the EU Green Deal initiative could have important  implications for Norwegian business and industry; it has been framed pri - marily as a waste management problem and an economic opportunity for  Norwegian companies that can offer ‘new smart, green solutions and  technology that will improve resource efficiency’ . As  a result, the strategy has raised attention to the necessity for companies to  prepare to compete in the context of strict rules on resource efficiency  . In 2018, Deloitte conducted a survey of 50 Norwegian  companies to illustrate circular initiatives being taken. The key finding was  that few companies are undertaking comprehensive circular efforts.  Companies that have some interest in circular approaches deal primarily in  consumer goods and related services linked closely to their EPR obliga - tions: ‘usually related to end-of-lifecycle returns, and customer engage - ment, usually related to educating the consumer in how they can reduce  their own waste’ . The objective of the survey was to  ‘motivate conversations between government and business that can work  as a starting point for developing a green economy’ . As part of the preparation of the strategy, the Standing Committee on  Energy and Environment invited specific industries to develop roadmaps  to promote more circular practices and reflect the idiosyncrasies of their  business base. Part of the roadmap proposals have been the industry per - spective on the most appropriate government response to their needs.  This interaction between the committee and external groups reflects a  long-standing practice of Norwegian governments observed in other areas  of environment policy. Bailey observed this characteristic in research on  Norway’s policy action on commercial whaling: Environmental and other civil society organizations are drawn into the cor - poratist channels where power has been traditionally centered. Civil society  organizations participate in the system of committees where policy forma - tion occurs and play a role in policy implementation. This system, which  incorporates civil society actors into governance and negotiates outcomes,  generally reduces the need for NGOs to play an external “watchdog” role,  to rely on broad public campaigns to push for legislative change, and to turn  to litigation to enforce environmental laws and regulations. 6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   118 The result of this approach has been a close relationship between indus - try and government in terms of framing environment policy arguments in  favour of business interests. Dryzek et al.  observed this close rela - tionship between these groups and the state in Norway, in a system that  values consensus. Avfall Norge developed the most significant roadmap in  the context of Norway’s ambitions to move to a circular economy given  its focus on the management of waste. While the roadmap reflects similar  proposals for other European countries, the authors see specific recom - mendations for Norway. To enhance reuse/recycling, a reduction of taxes  on labor and an increase of taxes on the use of primary raw materials   as well as introducing end-of-waste criteria  for specific products that could contribute to increase the market for sec - ondary materials. The managing director of Avfall Norge made this  observation: We need the government to actively drive and encourage the circular econ - omy. It establishes standards, acts as a facilitator and driver of change, and  ensures a level playing field on the market. The roadmap recommended that  the Government creates a clear national strategy for resource efficiency  which includes goals for waste minimization, reuse and material recovery, as  well as a distinct framework for the economic actors. The strategy must of  course be rooted in the EU’s Circular Economy Package.  Other roadmaps encourage the government to take stronger legislative  action than has hitherto been the case, for example the Norwegian  Federation of Industries argues that a feature of a low carbon economy is  higher demand for products with small carbon footprints from both pro - duction and use. ‘Norwegian process industries are, and will continue to  be, capable of supplying this demand with new, increasingly clean and  innovative products and processes. Achieving this requires predictable  framework conditions and continued access to renewable energy at com - petitive terms’ . A summary of the ideas from different Norwegian industry roadmaps is  outlined in Table  6.1. A long-term preference by the Norwegian government has been to  establish voluntary agreements between government and industry. In this  regard the government frames the solution to waste issues as the responsi - bility of both industry and households. The government approach is to set  boundaries and expectations and require industry participants to achieve  S. M. JONES 119 specific targets within agreed timeframes. Waste treatment is regulated and  influenced by policies and measures between different ministries. The  Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Oil and Energy and the Ministry  of Finance are jointly responsible for environmental taxes on different  energy resources and carriers and tax policies in general (Bauer and  Fischer-Bogason 2011 ). Research shows that the mix of voluntary agree - ments with other financial instruments can result in a situation of eco - nomic funding and taxes that fail to give the right incentives to actors in  the market, to manage waste in the most sustainable way (Raadal  et al. 2003 ). The processing of food waste in Norway is an example of a voluntary  sectoral agreement. The 2017 Industry agreement on the reduction  of food  waste  involved a cross-section of policy actors in the management of waste.  These included various government agencies, including the Ministry for  Climate and Environment, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Trade,  Industry and Fisheries. Industry groups were also critical actors as they  could volunteer to be part of the Agreement including groups like the  Groceries Sector’s Environmental Forum, the National Federation of  Service Industries, the Norwegian Fishermen’s Association and the  Norwegian Farmers and Smallholders Union have committed to partici - pate . The Agreement is an example of the Norwegian Table 6.1  Norway industry roadmap response (Nordic Council of Ministers   2020 ) Organisation Policy instrument The Federation of  Norwegian IndustriesIncrease recycling rates for building and construction.  Adopt strict recycling goals in legislation. Legislated waste  plan for all buildings. The Federation of  Norwegian Construction  IndustriesLegislated recycled content in new products. Regulated documentation requirements for materials used  in new constructions The trade organisation Bygg  uten GrenserLegislate traceability of building material/products. Environmental labelling for all building materials Increase knowledge of circular economy by focusing on  industrial symbiosis Norwegian Association of  Heavy Equipment  ContractorsBuilding regulations to require development of waste  plans and environmental management. Regulation of documentation of all materials used in new  constructions.6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   120 approach that attempts to share responsibilities between consumers and  producers. Industry organisations have signed the agreement to halve  food waste throughout the food value chain by 2030. The agreement is a  follow-up measure in line with UN Sustainable Development Goal 12.3.  It is more ambitious because the goal applies to the entire food value  chain, from primary production to consumers. The agreement may be  voluntary, but it is binding for the contracting parties . These  schemes however have been criticised for creating opportunities for ‘free  riders’ as there is no compulsion for food manufacturers to participate in  the Agreement, only to comply if they commit to it. Other weaknesses  include a lack of monitoring and performance assessments, lack of trans - parency on their cost effectiveness, failure of these schemes to promote  improved sustainable product design and distortions of international trade  markets that may disadvantage local firms participating in EPR schemes  . The agreement on food waste reflects similar  agreements in Norway that adopt EPR principles. These include voluntary  schemes on waste electrical and electronic equipment , batteries,  tyres, end-of-life vehicles , packaging waste and beverage packaging. The purpose of Norway’s EPR provisions is to facilitate take-back sys - tems to incentivise households in a way that promotes high recycling/ recovery rates. The Norwegian Waste Regulations, implemented in 2004,  contained chapters regarding the treatment of different waste streams and  requirements for recycling. There are requirements for the reception, col - lection, recycling and other treatment of electrical and electronic waste.  Distributors of these products are required to receive household WEEE  free of charge from shops or other collection points. Municipalities are  also required to ensure that there are sufficient reception facilities for these  products and accept this waste free of charge. Producer responsibility is  maintained by requiring participating producers to fund the collection,  sorting and treatment of WEEE through membership of a collectively-, or  individually-, funded return company. The regulation sets out recycling  targets which must be met by the return companies. Similar to the WEE  scheme, distributors of batteries are required to accept returned batteries  free of charge from shops or similar facilities. Norway is also investigating  possible EPR schemes and financial mechanisms for new take-back systems  on leisure boats and equipment from the fishing and fish-farming indus - tries . The most successful, and widely known Norwegian EPR arrangement,  is the recycling of approximately 97% of plastic bottles since 2011 by using  S. M. JONES 121 a nationwide bottle deposit scheme. The scheme is again based on key  policy actors in both government and the private sector. The state secre - tary for the Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment points out  that while the container scheme is successful and even a good model for  other countries, government should actually take a hands-off position:  ‘There should not be any bureaucracy involved. It’s been proven to work  and it’s a good idea in accordance with the plastic discussion’ (Milton  2018 , 2). Whether or not this position is the result of industry lobbying is  difficult to assess. The scheme involves the application of an environmen - tal tax that bottle producers must pay unless they take responsibility for  recycling over 95% of plastic bottles . The scheme is seen to  demonstrate the responsiveness of business to such incentives and the will - ingness of the Norwegian households to participate and benefit financially  in reverse vending arrangements if they are easily accessible. Jørgensen  argues that the Norwegian bottle deposit  scheme highlights three key insights into factors that influence consumer  recycling conditions. First, there is a financial incentive to return the plas - tic containers; second, the return system is clearly defined and convenient;  and third, responsibility for the scheme rests with the industrial actors that  produce and use the plastic containers. In the context of the arguments in  this book, a fourth insight is also clear, which is that governments with  responsibility for the relevant policy instruments, in this case the environ - mental tax, make its introduction a policy priority. The policy actions of  the Norwegian government applying the polluter-pays principle to pack - aging delegated the environmental and economic responsibility of recy - cling and reusing packaging to business . The Norwegian state  secretary for the Ministry for Climate and Environment stated in 2018: ‘A  lot of our plastic waste is exported to Sweden and Germany because they  have a better recycling industry, they have a better system than Norway’  . How to raise the policy priority for strengthening recy - cling capacity will become increasingly important for Norway as the circu - lar targets of the EU Parliament continue to place pressure on signatories  of the EEA to improve waste management policies and practices. 6.2.3   Policy Actors The Norwegian Public Report   requires each ministry to invite  experts and central stakeholders, to make a statement on current knowl - edge in a policy area . Through this process key actors 6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   122 relevant to policy debates have opportunities for input at the Green Paper  stage. Policy actors are instructed to arrange different forms of seminars  and input. The NOU is sent on public hearing so anyone can have an  opinion. In drafting a White Paper, each ministry explains their positions  and general policy approaches. This is a closed process, and there are  bureaucratic and political negotiations between sectors; it is the bureau - cracy’s statement of position with a political backing. Stortinget  is the pro - cess of receiving the White Paper to make decisions within committee—and  decisions are open in the form that specific issues should be dealt with, but  not as a statement of new regulation or budget. Rather, the ministry will  later have to defend whether the decisions are taken into account and  explain how. The Stortinget’s  Proposal  is a public document, but a different  form of White Paper explicitly suggesting and arguing for a new regula - tion . The Proposal  might be subject to public hear - ing, particularly if regulatory change is involved, and in either case is  subject to internal hearing within the ministries. The ministries will usually  involve stakeholders, but this is an obscure process and depends on exist - ing networks and forums and trust relations. The Stortinget  passes law,  and this law proposal will be subject of a public hearing. The traditional Norwegian approach is reflected in the recent policy  debate in the management of hazardous waste. Evidence suggests that  there are multiple issues relating to hazardous waste including the identi - fication of new landfill sites and the need to reduce the volumes of hazard - ous material being illegally dumped. The waste industry has been critical  of the government’s delay on determining new landfill sites to replace the  Langoya site which is reaching capacity . The minis - ter for climate and environment appointed an expert committee to exam - ine the issues in 2019. The committee considered how to reduce hazardous  waste and possible solutions to challenges of landfill. The committee is a  good example of the key policy actors in waste management in Norway,  consisting of five representatives from the waste industry, one from munic - ipal government, one from the Department of Environment and one aca - demic from the Faculty of Economics . Interestingly the  committee did not have representation from the construction industry— the main source of hazardous waste, or the incineration industry—one of  the main alternatives to landfill. The committee report argued that the  government needed to establish ‘clear targets for recycling and resource  utilization be taken into account by the authorities when making decisions  related to hazardous waste’ . The committee took the  S. M. JONES 123 opportunity to argue that a circular economy involved more than a focus  on waste. The government had been slow to act on promoting a circular  economy and needed to ‘act quickly’ in establishing measures to support  research, innovation and commercialisation . In response to ques - tions in the Stortinget  in 2020, the minister for climate and environment  admitted that there had been no follow-up to the committee’s report. The  minister confirmed that the ministry was undertaking its own assessments  including ‘dialogue with key industry players about possible solutions’.  There was no conclusion on the future treatment capacity for hazardous  waste or the establishment of new landfill sites . The Strategy for Green Competitiveness   was drafted in a col - laboration between the ministries of climate and environment, finance,  trade and industry, and petroleum and energy. A key finding of the Strategy  committee was that there needs to be improvements in cooperation  between authorities,  researchers and  the business sector. EPR-based requirements involve policy actors directly  involved in the production, disposal and recycling of waste. These actors  have been outlined in the relevant sections throughout this case study.  Government arguments on this suggest they believe that these actors have  better insight into the opportunities and challenges facing specific indus - tries. As a result, the government has been ‘strengthening cooperation in  the process industry sector between business and industry partners, the  public administration and researchers, and has established a long-term  strategic forum called Prosess21’ . Early initiatives  suggest that this new approach includes stakeholders from the industrial  and research sectors, Innovation Norway, the Research Council, and the  Norwegian Environment Agency. There are no guarantees however that  this approach will lead to policy change in waste management practices.  Steiner-Khamsi et al.  have analysed the Norwegian policy process  and the links between expert advice and evidence and the committee stage   and the political policy stage . They con - clude that in Norway around ‘90 percent of texts amassed by expert com - missions in order to provide evidence-based policy advice to the  government is ignored’ . In contrast to consultation, Norwegian  ministries tend to focus on their own evidence over other expert sources.  It is certainly difficult to ascertain any clarity on this matter through the  procedures of the Stortinget , where there is little information on debates  either in the Committees or in the Parliament. There is no public access to  submissions that may have been made by industry representatives to the 6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   124 debates on the discussion about the circular economy or waste manage - ment as outlined in the strategy. According to surveys among Norway’s MPs, the nature of political rep - resentation in the Norwegian Parliament means that lobby groups, as  policy actors, push their agenda through individual MPs. Rommetvedt   argued that 80–90% of the MPs agree that interest group lobbying  furnishes them with alternative information and counter expertise and,  therefore, improves their ability to control the executive’s follow-up of the  resolutions and intentions of the Stortinget . The politically fragmented  nature of political representation through a broad range of political parties  in the Norwegian parliament would suggest many opportunities for pres - sure through lobbying. One example where lobbying has proven to be  successful has been the efforts by WWF, over what it claims were many  years, for Norway to ban disposable plastic products. In 2019, the WWF  claimed its efforts had been somewhat vindicated when the minister for  climate and environment announced a Norwegian ban that would intro - duce producer responsibility for these products in 2020. The WWF argued  that it was disappointing that the government bill did not include a ‘clear  regulatory liability scheme for all plastic manufacturers’ .  Whether the Norwegian approach produces the most effective policy for  the overall management of waste and the achievement of stated goals  remains to be seen. 6.3  challenges  and opportun ItIes 6.3.1   Quantities of W aste Continue to Rise Despite setting a policy objective of decoupling waste from economic  growth, government figures show that waste continues to increase at a  higher rate than GDP . The Norwegian Environment Agency  argues that between 2007 and 2009 the growth in waste rates were lower  than economic growth, but after 2009 waste volumes increased more than  GDP, primarily due to an increase in household waste . The  largest source of waste in Norway has been the construction industry, but  much of this waste stream is recovered. Waste generation by industrial  activities has declined in the past ten years. Registered exports of waste  from Norway continue to increase with much of this waste exported to  Sweden for waste-to-energy  purposes . The state  secretary for the Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment argues  S. M. JONES 125 that despite the reliance on other countries taking the plastic collected in  Norway, there could be changes in the future. He mentions companies in  Norway taking an interest: ‘Several new companies are now building dif - ferent factories, different plants around the country and they can recycle  the plastic into bioethanol which is biofuel. So, there is a growing industry  in Norway’ . This approach reflects the corporatised  nature of Norwegian politics that industry should drive innovation in this  area rather than the government. Such approaches will continue to benefit  the interests of business and industry. Current analysis by Statistics Norway shows the following: the total  amount of waste generated in Norway was 11.8 million tonnes in 2018;  73% of all waste was recovered in 2018; there was 67% rise in total waste  quantities from 1995 to 2018 . In 2018, each  Norwegian, on average, produced 421 kg waste , while the  average figure for the 28 EU countries was 488  kg   . Waste amounts tend to fluctuate above and below GDP but the trend  is one that continues to rise. The trend for material recycling tends to go  down. This is mainly due to growth in waste from the construction indus - try, as the main source of an increasing amount of waste that is landfilled  . Fig. 6.1  Total waste is still going up 6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   126 6.3.2   Hazardous W aste Hazardous waste contains substances that are hazardous to health and the  environment, and in order to ensure that people and the environment are  not damaged by the hazardous waste, it is important that it is delivered for  proper treatment. The export of hazardous waste from Norway increased  from 505 thousand tonnes in 2012 to 1042 thousand tonnes in 2014.  Only France, with 1526 thousand tonnes has a higher rate than Norway;  see Fig.  6.3. These are the only recorded figures provided by Norway in a  context where EU countries report annually. To compare this figure,  Belgium’s  export of hazardous waste  in 2012 was 631 thousand tonnes and 637 thousand tonnes in 2014  . Reasons for the export increase include an insufficient  combustion capacity in Norway and a ban on the landfilling of biodegrad - able waste, coupled with changes in economic and market factors  . A lack of recycling facilities across  Norway contributes to the need for increasing volumes of waste being  exported for disposal through incineration on other countries. In 2016, the recovery of non-hazardous waste undergoing known  treatment was 74%, a decrease of 3% from 2015, this corresponds to 7.3  million tonnes. In 2016, 27% of non-hazardous waste undergoing known  Fig. 6.2  Waste in Norway by source  S. M. JONES 127 treatment was energy recovered, while 38% was subject to material recov - ery. The main reason for the decrease in recovery is less waste used as fill - ing compounds and cover materials in 2016 compared to the years before.  The hazardous waste statistics show that in 2016 around 19,000 tonnes,  or 1%, of all hazardous waste generated in Norway were delivered to  unknown handling—either dumped or illegally shipped . The  amount has decreased compared to previous years. These figures suggest  that the approaches taken in Norway are beginning to trend in accordance  with the expected reductions. Despite this, however, Norway continues to  be less effective than other European countries and below the targets set  by the EU . 6.3.3   Recycling Current EEA figures on recycling in Europe show Norway lagging behind  the leading countries in terms of both municipal waste and packaging  waste . In 2018, 47.5% of waste generated in EU countries  was recycled; in Norway the figure was 40.7%. There has been little  Fig. 6.3  Shipment of hazar dous waste from EU member states and EFTA coun - tries, 2001–2016.  6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   128 Hazardous waste for approved handling, by type of material. 1000 tonnes Overall 1 5452018 577 39 52 519 268 17 73 0 000902429151075386265 22 -7.8 -30.7 -7.9 -29.2 -18.9 217.470.0 -100.0-21.2-0.815.610.5 5.4 . . .2.8 1.837 45 523 340 10 23 1 02017 2014 2017 - 2018 2014 - 2018 1 6541  502 -6.6Percentage change 2.9 Oily Solvent borne Other organic Heavy metal waste and contaminated pulp corrosive Other inorganic process water Photochemicals Unknown Fig. 6.4  Hazardous waste in Norway  S. M. JONES 129 improvement in Norway since 2006 when 40.3% of municipal waste was  recycled, which at the time was a higher rate than the EU average of 33.2%  . By comparison, Germany has the highest recycling rate  for municipal waste of 67.3%. For packaging waste, the EU figure was  67.5% recycled, and for Norway it was 56.1%, down from 70.3% in 2006  . Less than one-third of the plastic packaging in Norway is  recycled for new products . By comparison, Belgium  recycles 83.8% of packaging waste. Statistics from the Norwegian govern - ment 2018 showed that overall more waste was going to landfill, includ - ing food waste, and less was being recycled . Unfortunately,  according to the Eurostat figures, the trajectory for recycling rates for  MSW and packaging waste in Norway seems to be trending downwards  over the last decade, despite the waste management policies intended to  promote more recycling. More positively, e-waste and biowaste have been  trending up. Table  6.2 shows Norway’s performance in the circular econ - omy measures applied to different aspects of waste over the  2006–2018 period. Two other circular economy measures developed by the EU include  the trade in recyclable materials across EU borders, including plastic,  paper and precious metals. Figures cover the period 2007–2019. Another  measure focuses on the circular material use rate, with a focus on material  recovered and fed back into the economy over the period 2010–2017. As  a reflection of Norway’s delay in establishing a circular strategy, the gov - ernment has been unable to provide data to the EU on these measures  . Table 6.2  EU circular economy measures 2006–2018: Norway  Measure 2006 2018 EU  2018 Recycling of municipal waste 40.3 40.7 47.1 Recycling of all waste excluding major mineral  wasteNA NA 57 Recycling of packaging waste 70.3 56.1 67 Recycling of e-waste 35.5  49.3  39.4 Recycling of bio-waste 62 72 83 Recovery rate of construction and demolition waste 44  71  896 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   130 The statistics on waste from households in Table  6.3 shows that Norway  has not been able to fulfil the requirement for material recycling in a per  capita basis in previous years. In 2008, the proportion of household waste  delivered for recycling was up to 44%. Since then, the share has dropped,  and has remained at just under 40% since 2011. A key issue for recycling  is the inconsistency of approaches taken by Norwegian municipalities. Larger municipal governments have access to resources, and in some  cases the political will, to support a stronger focus on recycling. One of the  most successful has been the Oslo Kommune, which won the European  Green  Capital Award  in 2019 for its approach to environmental issues,  including waste management. The city has been recognised for its approach  to environmental issues set ambitious climate change goals including  reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 95% by 2030 and achieving climate  neutrality by 2050. The management of waste in the city makes a major  contribution to these goals . In terms of recycling, the city has  invested in sorting technology in addition to source separation at the  household. Oslo is one of a few Norwegian cities to introduce source  separation of food waste and plastic packaging to help reduce greenhouse  gas emissions and improve local air quality. Source separation also helps  improve recycling rates and the recovery of valuable resources found in  waste products . The life cycle-based waste man - agement system in Oslo involves waste sorting using fully automated opti - cal sorting process for source-separated household waste, separated into  bags with specific colours. The optical sorting plants are equipped with  cameras that can identify the colours of the bags with about 98% accuracy. Table 6.3  Household waste in Nor way  Household waste: Main figures In total Percentage change 2016 2017 2018 2016–2017 2017–2018 In total 1000 tonnes 2277 2256 2241 −0.9 −0.7 Per capita 433.0 426.0 421.0 −1.6 −1.3 Sent to material recycling  868 881 892 1.5 1.3 Sent to material recycling. Per  capita165.0 166.3 167.5 0.8 0.7 The table was corrected 24 October 2019 S. M. JONES 131 The Haraldrud sorting plant in Oslo is currently the world’s largest (Oslo  2017 ). Households in Oslo sort their waste into three categories: food is  sorted in green bags, plastic packaging in blue bags and residual waste in  regular shopping bags. This type of waste separation is in addition to exist - ing systems for sorting paper and cardboard, glass, metal and hazardous  waste. A major advantage of this system is that the bags can all be placed  into the same bin and transported in the same vehicle to the waste man - agement plant. Plastic waste in the blue bags is sent to treatment plants in  Germany and Sweden, where it is sorted into five to seven categories. The  plastic is melted into granules and then used as raw material in making  new plastic products. The Oslo Energy Recycling Agency collects house - hold waste from the municipality, produces district heating and makes  biogas and biofertiliser. The life cycle-based waste management system  contributes to helping the city to achieve its ambitious climate goals, for  example material for recycling of 50% . In Norway, the Ministry of Climate and the Environment oversees  implementation of the nation’s waste management goals. In many respects,  Norway can be regarded as a leader in the development and application of  recycling and sorting technologies, particularly for its plastic bottle deposit  scheme. Despite this success there are a number of challenges resulting  from the institutional characteristics of the multilevel Norwegian context  that need policy priority to overcome if future performance is to achieve  the expectations set by the EU. While the promotion of the circular econ - omy in both the EU and Norway is focused on waste management, there  are specific areas that require stronger regulatory action if circular objec - tives are to be advanced. In some municipalities, waste collection charges are at, or close to, cost-   recovery levels. More differentiated charges, according to weight or waste  fractions, could provide further incentives to increase recycling and waste  reduction. Extended producer responsibility regimes have been broad - ened and their effectiveness has been enhanced by the introduction of  taxes connected with deposit-refund systems for end-of-life products.  Further refinement of these policies could be supported by a clearer regu - latory framework to overcome the weaknesses identified on the EPR  schemes that create unfair competition in the marketplace and a lack of  innovation in product design. The waste industry argues that the govern - ment could use its considerable purchasing power more effectively in pro - moting demands on how much waste is to be recycled. There are  inconsistencies across government departments in their purchasing 6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   132 regimes that fail to ensure that stronger requirements of suppliers and  manufacturers meet EPR requirements . Ensuring  that new products placed on the market contain less hazardous substances  will also be important. In order to achieve this, product standards or  design requirements could be developed and applied through the govern - ment procurement processes. A policy priority for sustainability and inter - est from the public all contribute to potential success in meeting stronger  recycling targets. Access to current and accurate data on waste management has been  problematic in completing this case study. The demand for good waste  statistics is increasing in light of ambitious material recycling targets in the  EU. In 2018, the Stortinget announced that it would support strengthen - ing the waste statistics. To achieve ambitious material recycling goals  requires good systems to measure progress. It seems good-quality data has  not been a priority area in Norway. The EU plans to implement changes  in how material recycling is measured from 2020. It is material recycling  that will count, where losses in various sorting and recycling processes will  be deducted. In addition, rules are being developed for how to report  preparation for reuse ‘prepare for reuse’ . Norwegian  statistics indicate approximately 38% material recycling, both for house - hold waste and waste from service industries. In practice, the amount  actually used as raw material for new products is considerably lower, which  gives a poorer starting point in relation to new ambitious requirements.  Avfall Norge  has identified various practices in municipalities on  how to report quantity to material recycling. There has been obscurity and  grey areas in terms of inclusions and exclusions of different types of waste  and sources. Problems include the following: reporting forms are incom - plete and somewhat inconsistent, reporting guidelines are imprecise,  allowing for different interpretations and practices, statistics reporting  does not focus on the municipalities, and, finally, statistics do not show a  complete picture of the amount of household waste. The result is that  users of the statistics find it to be inaccurate and uncertain. Comparative  data between municipalities can give incorrect information about both  specific waste quantities and the efficiency of sorting and recycling. There are calls for Norway’s collection systems to avoid over-reliance  on sorting recyclables from mixed waste or co-mingled streams. The con - cern is that the quality of certain streams such as paper and cardboard is  considerably higher when separated at source than when extracted from  more mixed streams. Additionally, material losses from sorting  S. M. JONES 133 technologies are greater than those from separate collection. and this  becomes a particular issue when recycling targets rise. As such, whilst sort - ing technologies will likely form a valuable part of Norway’s approach to  meeting the increasing recycling targets, they should be used in conjunc - tion with approaches which prioritise separate collection and high capture  rates of high quality of recycling, as in the Oslo Kommune example. In  2018, mixed residual waste accounted for 42% of the total amount of  household waste and represents the largest waste fraction. Much of the  residual waste goes to energy recovery where WtE facilities are available.  According to Avfall Norge , there are large amounts of food waste  and plastic within the residual component that could have been sorted out  and recycled. Analyses of Norwegian municipalities show that up to half of  all food waste is thrown in the residual waste, instead of in the bag for food  waste. Waste industry calls for regulatory measures to ban the use of black  plastic bags is one simple measure that could improve transparency and  sorting quality. . The utilisation of waste resources  through material recycling is central to EU waste targets and environmen - tal legislation. As an EEA member, Norway is bound by the EU waste  framework directive that requires 50% material recycling of household  waste and household-like waste by 2020. These figures suggest that  Norway will struggle to meet the EU’s circular economy targets of recy - cling municipal waste set at 55% by 2025, 60% by 2030 and 65% by 2035  without stronger government commitment to establish targets and mea - sures to support them . Jørgensen argues that the ‘history of Norwegian packaging recycling in  the twentieth century demonstrates that recycling requires not only an  awareness of waste generation but also a commitment to involving waste  management in everyday practices’ . The Norwegian situation  also reflects waste management challenges in other multilevel systems. The  government has a responsibility to monitor and respond to trends in  changing attitudes to waste and recycling. There has been acceptance of  disposal fee schemes and refund deposit schemes. Such schemes, where  implemented, have resulted in improvements in rates of recycling.  Unfortunately, there has not been the political will to make such schemes  universal as implementation is largely a municipal responsibility (Kipperberg  2007 ). There is a general reluctance at the national level to propose initia - tives that can be interpreted as reducing municipal sovereignty. The  Nordic Council of Environment Ministers report on waste practices in  Norway recognises that regional differences in recycling rates are notable. 6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   134 As recycling collections are a municipal responsibility, there is for the  national government to promote greater consistency in approach to col - lections, improve consumer understanding and send a clearer message  about desired recycling behaviour. Such changes have the potential to  ensure that all municipalities offer a service that is likely to support  improved rates of recycling . A lack of clear regulation also impacts on the environmental crime in  connection with the management of waste from the construction industry.  The main challenge is that the current regulations allow for cheating. The  challenge seems to be that there are no barriers in the regulations that  ensure transparency in waste management for demolition waste. There are  grey areas in the building regulations and in the pollution regulations that  lead to illegal mass handling. Stronger regulatory interventions at the  municipal level that allow for transparency and monitoring need to be  introduced. Construction waste and illegal dumping are areas of waste  management that continue to increase, and stakeholders have been lobby - ing for government interventions . Increased collec - tions of hazardous waste and treatment of hazardous waste collected have  contributed to reducing the environmental impact of Norway’s waste. The Nordic Council of Ministers report shows that municipal waste  generation in Norway is higher than Organisation for Economic  Co-operation and Development  or EU15 averages, although  the reported household waste fraction corresponds to the OECD average  . While there have been some important achieve - ments in the recycling of certain elements of plastic waste and e-waste,  more needs to be done in other sources of waste if Norway continues to  deal with the challenges of managing waste in the context of EU direc - tives. The political priority framework, as applied in this chapter, has  helped to reveal some of the key factors and complexities that shape waste  management policy in Norway. Current government commitments and  statements continue to support EU initiatives. Despite these commit - ments, the Norwegian government is yet  to  produce the circular economy strategy as intended in the 2017 White  Paper. In a speech to the Norwegian Circular Economy Conference, the  minister for climate and environment gave an indication of the challenges  being faced in developing the strategy: ‘In our work with the circular  economy strategy, ten ministries are cooperating, in close connection with  the industry. Cross-ministerial cooperation can be challenging, but it is  the only way to go forwards’ . The evidence covered in this  S. M. JONES 135 case study suggests that policy priority for change will continue to play an  integral role in establishing interventions in improvements in waste man - agement outcomes and support stronger commitments to circular objec - tives in Norway. references Avfall Norge. . Circular economy are you getting impatient?  Retrieved from  https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/10-  tiltak-  du- kan- starte-  med-  i- dag. Avfall Norge. . The expert committee on hazardous waste has submitted its  report . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/ ekspertutvalget-  om- farlig-  avfall-  har- levert-  sin- rapport . Avfall Norge. . The amount of household waste per capita has been reduced  by 3.5 per cent from the previous year . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/ bransjen/nyheter/mengden-  husholdningsavfall-  per- innbygger-  er- redusert-   med-  3- 5- prosent-  fra- året- før. Avfall Norge. . Releasing environmental demands from the Stortinget—But  they are not alone . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/ slappe-  miljøkrav-  fra- stortinget-  men-  de- er- ikke- alene . Avfall Norge. . No to black bags . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/ bransjen/nyheter/nei-  til- svarte-  søppelsekker . Avfall Norge. . Lack of regulations leads to environmental crime . Retrieved  from https://www.avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/manglende-  regelverk-    fører-  til- miljøkriminalitet . Avfall Norge. . Important improvements in waste statistics . Retrieved from  https://www.avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/viktige-  forbedringer-  i-   avfallsstatistikken . Avfall Norge. . About . Retrieved from https://www.avfallnorge.no/ . Avfall Norge. . The authorities must be on the path to solve the plastic chal - lenges . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/ myndighetene-  må- på- banen . Avfall Norge. . The environment agency proposes to change the regulations  for plastic packaging . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/ nyheter/miljødirektoratet-  foreslår-  å- endre-  regelverket-  for- plastemballasje . Avfall Norge. . Langoya discussed in the Stortinget’s question time . Retrieved  from https://www.avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/langøya-  diskutert-  i-   stortingets-  spørretime . Bailey, J. L. . Norway, the United States, and commercial whaling: Political  culture and social movement framing. The Journal of Environment &  Development, 18 , 79–102.6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   136 Bauer, B., & Fischer-Bogason, R. . Voluntary agreements and environmen - tal labelling in the Nordic countries . Nordic Council of Ministers. Deloitte. . Norwegian Circular Economy Benchmark 2017. Online: http:// info.deloitte.no/rs/777-LHW-455/images/20180313_Norwegian%20 Circular%20Economy%20Benchmark%202017.pdf Dryzek, J. S., Downes, D., Hunold, C., Schlosberg, D., & Hernes, H. K. .  Green states and social movements: Environmentalism in the United States,  United Kingdom, Germany, and Norway . Oxford: OUP. European Environment Agency . . Eionet report. Resource effi - ciency and circular economy in Europe—Even more from less. An overview of  policies, approaches and targets of Norway in 2018. Retrieved from https:// www.eea.europa.eu/countries-  and- regions/norway . European Environment Agency . . Waste recycling . Retrieved from  https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-  and- maps/indicators/waste-  recycling-  1/ assessment-  1. European Environment Agency . . Resource efficiency and the cir - cular economy in Europe 2019—Even more from less. Eurostat. . 487 kg of municipal waste generated per person . Retrieved from  https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-  eurostat-  news/-  / DDN-  20190123-  1. Eurostat. . Waste shipment statistics . Retrieved from  https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-  explained/index.php/ Waste_shipment_statistics#General_overview . Eurostat. . Circular economy indicators . Retrieved from https:// ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database?p_p_id=NavTreeportletprod_WAR_ NavTreeportletprod_INSTANCE_nPqeVbPXRmWQ&p_p_lifecycle=0&p_p_ state=normal&p_p_mode=view&p_p_col_id=column-  2&p_p_col_count=1 . FNI . . Norwegian Process  Industries Roadmap. Online: https://www.norskindustri.no/siteassets/doku- menter/rapporter-og-brosjyrer/the-norwegian-process-industries-roadmap- summary.pdf . Hanssen, G. S., Hovik, S., Indset, M., Klausen, J. E., & Stokke, K. B. .  Implementing EUs water framework directive in Norway: Can the new river  basin districts ensure environmental policy integration? International Journal  of Water Governance, 4 , 1–26. Hildebrand, S. H. . The future is Nigh: Norwegian waste governance regimes  from 1860 to 2010 and an analysis of current waste prevention policies . Master’s  thesis, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås. International Solid Waste Association . . Nancy strand on Norway’s  circular ambition . Retrieved from https://www.iswa.org/media/publica- tions/presidents-  blog/prezsezmore/browse/3/article/ guest-  blog-  nancy-  strand-  on- norways-  circular-  ambition/1383/ . S. M. JONES 137 Jørgensen, F. A. . Green citizenship at the recycling junction: Consumers  and infrastructures for the recycling of packaging in twentieth-century Norway.  Contemporary European History, 22 , 499–516. Karstensen, K. H., Engelsen, C. J., & Saha, P. K. . Circular economy initia - tives in Norway. In S.  K. Ghosh , Circular economy: Global perspective   . Singapore: Springer. Kipperberg, G. . A comparison of household recycling behaviours in  Norway and the United States. Environmental and Resource Economics,  36, 215–235. KS . .  European and international affairs . Retrieved from https://www.ks.no/om-   ks/ks-  in- english/european-  and- international-  affairs/ . Malinauskaite, J., Jouhara, H., Czajczyn ́ska, D., Stanchev, P., Katsou, E.,  Rostkowski, P., Thorne, R.  J., Colon, J., Ponsá, S., Al-Mansour, F., &  Anguilano, L. . Municipal solid waste management and waste-to-energy  in the context of a circular economy and energy recycling in Europe. Energy,  141, 2013–2044. Milton, S. . War on waste—What can Australia learn from Norway?   Boomerang Alliance. Retrieved from https://www.google.com/ search?client=firefox-  b- d&q=War+on+waste+–+what+can+Australia+learn+fro m+Norway%3F . Nachmany, Michal, Fankhauser, Sam , Davidová, Jana, Kingsmill, Nick,  Landesman, Tucker, Roppongi, Hitomi, Schleifer, Philip, Setzer, Joana,  Sharman, Amelia, Singleton, C. Stolle, Sundaresan, Jayaraj and Townshend,  Terry . The 2015 Global Climate Legislation Study: a review of climate  change legislation in 99 countries: summary for policy-makers. . Grantham  Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, GLOBE  International, London, UK. NEA. . Environment goals: Pollution . Retrieved from https://www.envi- ronment.no/goals/4.-  pollution/target-  4.1/. NEA. . Waste generation increases more than GDP . Retrieved from  https://www.environment.no/waste-  gdp. Neligan, A. . 2025 recycling target: Only 10 EU countries on track,  IW-Kurzbericht, No. 28/2018. Institut der deutschen Wirtschaft , Köln. NMCE. . Visions and ambitions for a circular economy in Norway . Retrieved  from https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/visions-  and- ambitions-  for- a-  circular-  economy-  in- norway/id2740057/ . Nordic Council of Ministers . . Policy brief: Clean Nordic Oceans—A  network to reduce litter and ghost fishing . Retrieved from https://www.nor- den.org/en/publication/policy-  brief-  clean-  nordic-  oceans-  network-  reduce-   marine-  litter-  and- ghost-  fishing .6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   138 Norway. . The industry agreement on the reduction of food waste.  Retrieved  from https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/1c911e254aa0470692 bc311789a8f1cd/industry-  agreement-  on- reduction-  of- food-  waste_ norway.pdf . Norway. . National statement on the EEA Agreement debate . Retrieved  from https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/eea_debate/id2678349/ . Norway. . Official Norwegian reports . Retrieved from https://www. regjeringen.no/en/find-  document/norwegian-  official-  reports/id1767/ . Norway. . What is circular economy?  Retrieved from https://www.miljo- direktoratet.no/ansvarsomrader/avfall/sirkular-  okonomi/ . Norwegian Environment Agency . . Waste and recovery . Online:  https://www.environment.no/Topics/Waste/ . Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment . . Better  growth, lower emissions—The Norwegian Government’s strategy for green com - petitiveness . Retrieved from https://www.regjeringen.no/en/dokumenter/ bedre-  vekst-  lavere-  utslipp%2D%2Dregjeringens-  strategi-  for- gronn-   konkur ransekraft-  engelsk/id2575420/ . Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment . . Waste as  resource—Waste policy and circular economy . Norwegian White Paper 45 (Meld.  St. 45, 2016–2017, Melding til Stortinget) . Retrieved from  https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/the-  norwegian-  government-  steps-   up- the- efforts-  to- turn-  waste-  into-  resources-  and-  reduce-  marine-  litter/ id2558322/ . Oslo Municipality. . Fact sheet: Optical sorting of household wastes . City of  Oslo: Waste-to-Energy Agency. Retrieved from https://www.oslo. kommune.no/ . Oslo Municipality. . Action Plan to reduce plastic pollution in the Oslo Fjord  2019–2020 . Retrieved from https://www.klimaoslo.no/report/action-  plan-  to-   reduce-  plastic-  pollution/ . Papineschi, J. Hogg, D. Chowdhury, T., Durrant, C., & Thomson, A. .  Analysis of Nordic regulatory framework and its effect on waste prevention and  recycling in the region.  Nordic Council of Ministers. Retrieved from https:// www.norden.org/en/publication/analysis-  nordic-  regulatory-  framework-  and-  its- effect-  waste-  prevention-  and- recycling . Raadal, H., Hanssen, O. J., & Askham, C. A. . Evaluation of new regula - tions with regard to material recycling and energy recovery for three waste  fractions. Ostfold Research Reports 20.03. . Rommetvedt, H. . The rise of the Norwegian parliament: Studies in  Norwegian parliamentary government . Routledge. SSB. . Does not meet target of 50 percent material recycling . Retrieved from  https://www.ssb.no/natur-  og- miljo/artikler-  og- publikasjoner/ oppfyller-  ikke- mal- om- 50- prosent-  materialgjenvinning . S. M. JONES 139 SSB. . Less recycling-more waste to landfill . Retrieved from https://www. ssb.no/en/natur-  og- miljo/artikler-  og- publikasjoner/ less- recycling-  more-  waste-  to- landfill . SSB. . Dangerous waste . Retrieved from https://translate.googleusercon- tent.com/translate_c?depth=1&hl=en&prev=search&rurl=translate.google. com&sl=no&sp=nmt4&u=https://www.ssb.no/natur-  og- miljo/statistikker/ spesavf&usg=ALkJrhjvjCmhyLyyYm9lnZ7674Mbmkb1qw . SSB. . Waste from households . Retrieved from https://www.ssb.no/en/ natur-  og- miljo/statistikker/avfkomm . Statistics Norway . . Waste increasing at the same rate as GDP . Retrieved  from https://www.ssb.no/en/natur-  og- miljo/artikler-  og- publikasjoner/ waste-  increasing-  at- the- same-  rate- as- gdp. Steiner-Khamsi, G., Karseth, B., & Baek, C. . From science to politics:  Commissioned reports and their political translation into white papers. Journal  of Education Policy, 35 , 119–144. Stortinget. . The standing committee on energy and the environment .  Retrieved from https://www.stortinget.no/en/In-  English/Standing-   Commitees/The-  Standing-  Committee-  on- Energy-  and- the- Environment/?ta b=MembersCommittee#primaryfilter . Taylor, M. . Can Norway help us solve the plastic cri - sis, one bottle at a time. The Guardian . Retrieved from https:// www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/jul/12/ can- norway-  help-  us- solve-  the- plastic-  crisis-  one- bottle-  at- a- time. Torsteinsen, H., & Genugten, M. . Municipal waste management in  Norway and the Netherlands—From in-house provision to inter-municipal  cooperation. In S. Kuhlman & G. Bouckaert , Local public sector reforms  in times of crisis: National trajectories and international comparisons . London:  Palgrave Macmillan. Wijkman, A., & Skanberg, K. . The circular economy and benefits for soci - ety: Jobs and climate clear winners in an economy based on renewable energy  and resource efficiency. A study pertaining to the Norwegian economy.  Club of Rome. World Wildlife Fund . . Requires manufacturer responsibility for all  plastic . Retrieved from https://www.wwf.no/nyheter/krever-  produsentansvar-    for- all- plast. Zero Waste Europe. . Extended producer responsibility–Creating the frame  for circular products . Retrieved from https://zerowasteeurope.eu/down- loads/extended-  producer-  responsibility-  creating-  the- frame-  for- circular-    products-  2/.6 W ASTE MANAGEMENT IN NORWAY   141 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7_7CHAPTER 7 Synthesis and Conclusions: Unsustainable  Status Quo? Abstract  This chapter pr esents a synthesis of the material covered in the  previous chapters. The waste crisis is highlighted as a significant policy  issue facing governments. The need for policy change to become a priority  for policymakers is discussed. The evidence presented in the case studies  reveals the challenges faced in promoting and advancing a circular in mul - tilevel political systems. Ideas for governments considering circular  approaches to waste management are also outlined. Keywords  Circular economy • Policy change • Multilevel systems •  political priority 7.1  A W Aste MAnAgeMent Crisis How developed countries can transition to more economically and envi - ronmentally sustainable approaches to waste management has become a  key policy question for governments. In its purest form, sustainable  approaches progressively eliminate waste by keeping resources in contin - ual use. The complex issues surrounding waste management policy reveal  the nature and scope of the challenges facing governments attempting to  implement sustainable approaches. This book started with a question:  What happens to our waste? The evidence presented throughout suggests  that the answer is increasingly more to do with politics and competition  142 between powerful interests than about sustainability practices and pre - venting environmental damage. The contemporary view of waste is that it  is a valuable resource that needs new methods and approaches to extract  the best value. As we approach the target date for the UN Sustainable  Development Goals  in 2030, what happens to our waste over the  next decade is a critical policy problem for government policymakers. In 2015, the UN advocated taking a holistic approach towards waste  management and recognising waste and resource management as a signifi - cant contributor to achieving more sustainable development. The UN  acknowledged a need for addressing governance issues which help to  establish sustainable solutions—including regulatory and other policy  instruments, the partnerships and the financing models .  Current debates about the crisis in waste management raise many issues  requiring policy action. The recycling failures revealed in the media high - light policy issues that have potential to impact on citizen trust in political  decision-makers. Citizens who comply with recycling requirements set by  governments have expectations that environmental values will be met,  with a corresponding loss of trust if they are not (Blaug et  al. 2006 ;  Saphores et al. 2012 ). Canada’s prime minister referred to this in 2019,  when he said: ‘To be honest, as a dad, it’s tough trying to explain this to  my kids. How do you explain dead whales washing up on beaches around  the world, their stomachs jam-packed with plastic bags?’ .  The struggle to deliver solutions to crucial public challenges like waste  management has contributed to a reduction of trust in governments in  some Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development   countries . Governments are increasingly seen to  be placing interests of business over the demands of citizens. This has been  supported by recent surveys in Europe that show institutional trust levels  of individuals and trustworthiness of government ‘should be considered  important factors for recycling behaviour’ . The waste crisis has created a sense of urgency towards identifying  actions that governments can take to establish more sustainable approaches  to manage waste. Despite the introduction of waste management policies  in many OECD countries that reflect sustainability principles, evidence  presented in Chap. 1 shows that, while there are some improvements,  there continues to be a crisis that appears to be worsening. Research sug - gests waste generation is a key contributor to the problem with the growth  in waste seemingly uncontrollable (Ferronato and Torretta 2019 ;  Minelgaite and Liobikiene 2019 ). As population in urban areas continues  S. M. JONES 143 to increase, living standards improve, and higher standards of living sup - port greater levels of production and consumption—volumes of waste  continue to rise exponentially. As a result of these trends, current predic - tions show that, without urgent policy action, global volumes of waste will  increase by 70% by 2050 . The notion of a circular economy is of great interest to both researchers  and practitioners as it is seen to reinvigorate enthusiasm in the concept of  sustainability. Proposals for circular approaches require a distinct shift  away from long-term linear practices that include one of capitalism’s driv - ing principles—planned obsolescence. Responsibilities for business include  designing better products that last longer; manufacturing better-quality  goods; using fewer virgin raw materials; and viewing waste as a resource.  With such changes it is argued that a circular economy can begin to  develop. To achieve these outcomes, government policies can provide  support to help make corporations more responsible in terms of their  impact on natural resources and the environment generally. Without some  form of intervention to prioritise more sustainable practices, current fore - casts reveal a continuation of the unsustainable status quo (Forcinio 2020 ;  Hartley et al. 2020 ). 7.2  A C irCulAr response The reduction of waste and the promotion of recycling industries are criti - cal to circular approaches in collecting waste materials and end-of-life  products and processing them for reuse as new products. Government  policy plays an important role in supporting the transition by industry and  society and promoting widespread penetration of circular approaches. The  discourse of zero-waste and the circular economy has been championed by  key policy actors, such as the European Commission, management consul - tancies, NGOs and multinational companies (Valenzuela and Böhm  2017 ). The circular economy is primarily discussed through the 3R prin - ciples of the waste hierarchy of reducing, reusing and recycling (Ranta  et al. 2018 ; Milios 2018 ). The OECD also takes a waste management– based approach to a circular economy and emphasises resource efficiency  and effectiveness as key values. In 2014, the European Commission released Towards a circular econ - omy: A zero waste programme for Europe,  emphasising the link between a  circular economy and waste management. The EU claims that the eco - nomic benefits of a circular economy will be numerous and significant, 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   144 including enhancing the security of supply for raw materials, stimulating  GDP growth, strengthening the competitiveness of businesses in the EU  and helping to protect the environment .  One area of particular interest has been the recycling of precious metals  found in electronic goods. The UN and the EU do not want to risk the  future development of energy efficient technologies through a lack of  access to critical metals . The EU Directive 2018/851 on  waste updates a 2008 EU Directive and establishes targets for waste pre - vention, reuse and recycling that reflect the EU ambition to move to a  circular economy . There has been mixed response by member  states to the 2008 Directive so in 2018 the EU argued that it needed to  set clear targets to improve performance. Member states of the EU adopt an individual policy approach to achieve  the targets set in the 2018 Directive. The EU regulations are taken as a  minimum standard, and some countries have set higher targets. Research  by the European Environment Agency shows that 19 out of 35 EU coun - tries have increased their recycling rates by 10% since 2008. In some coun - tries, such as Estonia, Malta and Serbia, the very low proportion of recycled  municipal waste barely changed . Results suggest that there  are inconsistencies in the approaches taken across the EU because of fac - tors unique to each jurisdiction that impact on the policy response and the  results achieved. For example, some countries have banned incineration,  while others have been establishing incinerators as another ‘end of pipe’  method of disposal. Like landfill, incineration is contrary to circular prin - ciples as it removes material from the waste process that can no longer be  recycled or reused. The EU Directive of 2018 reinforces the commitment  to waste management as the focus of policy action to shift the EU from a  linear to a circular economy. New targets reinforce the importance of recy - cling over landfill, the mandatory separation of bio-waste and the applica - tion of the ‘polluter pays’ principle through extended producer  responsibility. In multilevel systems, policymakers examining methods of advancing  circular economy approaches operate within the constraints of their insti - tutional arrangements, where radical change may not be possible due to  competing priorities between levels of government. The focus on closing  loops places circular economy at odds with many of the norms, logics and  routines of the linear economy which, in many ways, makes it counterin - tuitive to established economic patterns for growth. Long-standing modes  of governing the waste systems have established social, institutional and  S. M. JONES 145 financial arrangements benefiting policy actors and organisations based on  linear arrangements . Despite the  challenges, as outlined in Chap. 2, there is still enthusiasm for the concept  of a circular economy as a framework for future sustainable economic  development. Policy priority needs to be strengthened to move beyond  current approaches. We need to examine what is required to achieve prior - ity on the political agenda to help ensure that more substantial approaches  are adopted. There is a need for policy design, for policy coherence and to  broaden the scope of circular economy policy to reflect all pillars of circu - lar economy and not just recycling. For effective transition to circular  economy to occur, these matters need to achieve high political priority on  the policy agenda of government to promote change. 7.3  politi CAl priority The policy change literature on environmental policy shows how govern - ments have been reluctant to act, particularly in the integration of new  policy initiatives across jurisdictions in multilevel systems (Ross and Dovers  2008 ). In many jurisdictions, environment policy resides primarily with  the subnational and local governments. This is particularly true for waste  management policy where municipal governments are generally responsi - ble. The framework of political priority proposed in Chap. 3 is derived  from multiple policy change theories that reveal a range of dimensions and  their determinants to potentially influence and shape political priority. The  core argument is that with increased political priority circular approaches  to waste management will become a more central or salient policy com - mitments. The framework consists of four interrelated dimensions: politi - cal context, (the political and institutional environments in which actors  operate), the power of actors, (political strength of individuals and organ - isations concerned with the issue), the influence of ideas, (how political  actors understand and frame the issue) and problem characteristics (the  features of the problem being considered). By utilising the determinants of political priority outlined in the frame - work, we have some understanding of the complexities that may emerge  in according these issues a higher policy priority for a transition from the  linear to the circular economy. Political priority will be necessary for policy  change to support acting on the key objectives beyond recycling and waste  management. Negotiating the idiosyncrasies of policymaking around cir - cular issues in individual policy contexts will also play an important role in 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   146 determining policy change once political priority has been established. In  order to gain a deeper understanding of the complexities around these  issues, the experiences gleaned from the case studies in Chaps. 3 and 4 of  Belgium and Norway are informative for other multilevel systems consid - ering progressing their circular economy agenda. The achievement of the UN 2030 SDGs will require intergovernmental  approaches with effective institutional coordination and coherence at all  levels of policymaking. This will contribute to ensuring more integrated  policy frameworks for sustainable development; promoting synergies  between economic, social and environmental policies; identifying trade-   offs; and considering transboundary and intergenerational impacts.  Without these critical elements, developing and implementing circular  economy objectives will be challenging. In order to ensure that these  aspects are incorporated into government policies, political priority will be  critical. In the next section, the experiences of Belgium and Norway will  be outlined under each of the dimensions of the analytical framework. 7.4  reAlity CheCk: W hAt the CAses reveAl 7.4.1   Policy Context The policy context r eveals the constitutional and institutional arrange - ments that determine responsibilities and authority for policies relevant for  waste management. Constitutional responsibility sets the context for poli - cymaking; it impacts on laws, customs and established practices and organ - isational settings that can be powerful in determining policy action. This is  particularly the case in multilevel systems where policy responsibility for  specific issues can rest with one level of government. Belgium is a federal  state with quite autonomous regional governments which all move at a  different pace towards sustainable development. There are difficulties in  implementing a common strategy on the national level, as regional gov - ernments have a high degree of self-rule, and many contrasting interests  stand in the way of a consensus. In recent years, Flanders has set up a  strong institutional sustainable development framework, including the  framework for the development of a regional sustainable development  strategy . The Belgian state is the  legal entity responsible for compliance with EU legislative requirements  for waste. No federal authority has precedence over the regions exercise of  environmental powers. As in the European Waste Framework Directive  S. M. JONES 147 2008, waste is defined by the three regional governments, Wallonia,  Flanders and Brussels, as any substance or object which the holder dis - cards. Municipal governments are responsible for implementation of  regional waste policy priorities. Belgian regions have implemented the  European provisions relating to by-products and end of waste status.  Belgium’s initial response to a policy window created by public pressure  over reducing landfill in the 1990s was part of a European trend to sup - port greater levels of sustainability particularly in the management of  waste. The work of OVAM and the Interregional Packaging Commission  helps support institutional arrangements to promote policy coordination  and cooperation between the regional governments that are important for  facilitating policy change. These institutional arrangements are decentral - ised and allow for experimentation and mutual learning that are important  advantages of multilevel systems. The introduction of circular economy initiatives by the EU has been  reflected by each of the Belgian governments. The Belgian government  introduced 21 measures towards establishing a circular economy in 2016  ; Flanders introduced the ‘Circular Flanders: Together  towards a circular economy. Kick-off Statement’ ; Wallonia  introduced its ‘Strategy for the deployment of circular economy in 2020’  ; Brussels City introduced the ‘Brussels Capital region  circular economy strategy in 2016’ . There has been a  tendency to streamline waste legislation into one code in terms of inspec - tion, prevention, determination and sanctioning of environmental issues.  For example, the cooperative agreement between the three regions and  the packaging sector was established in 1994 for recovering and recycling  the packaging waste. The current version is the Cooperation Agreement of  04-11-2008 on the prevention and management of packaging waste . Belgium  has established ‘arms-length’ government agencies, with responsibility for  waste policy, with governance arrangements that support high levels of  policy autonomy vis-à-vis the minister . These agencies  declare that they are able to choose their preferred target groups and pol - icy instruments. In the case of OVAM in Flanders, it can develop and  implement legislation focused on waste management for the Flanders  region with a focus on establishing a circular economy. Waste manage - ment has been regarded as a reasonably uncontroversial policy area in the  past and so requires little political oversight. The intergovernmental IVC-   CIE has r esponsibility to formulate proposals and advice for the regional  governments on amending a joint agreement on waste management 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   148 . Research has indicated that Belgian agencies tend to be  more innovative and customer oriented than their government counter - parts, especially if there is sufficient autonomy and result control (Verhoest  et al. 2012 ). Research by Campbell- Johnson et al.  suggests that  multilevel policy integration is needed to alter value chains to enable  greater reduction in material inputs and changes in actor behaviour  towards a transition to a circular economy. Whether Belgian waste man - agement agencies can take policy action on the more challenging, and  perhaps controversial, aspects of the circular economy, such as reducing  consumption, without pushback from political and business interests  remains to be seen. In 2017, the Norwegian government produced a White Paper, Waste as  a resource —waste policy and circular economy , which outlines proposals on  how Norway could potentially meet EU circular economy objectives. By  2020, the government was yet to introduce a strategy aimed at establish - ing a circular economy . The national government has  overall responsibility for regulating waste, setting the general framework  for stakeholders, and leaving municipalities and industry responsible for  local collection and treatment solutions. By 2020, only the Oslo city gov - ernment mentioned a circular economy in the context of its green city  objectives that include waste management . The  National Waste Management and Prevention Plan  ‘From Waste to  Resources ’, was an attempt by the national government to establish a com - prehensive coordinated waste management plan across each level of gov - ernment. In 2013, the Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment  set 26 environmental targets, including dealing with biodiversity, climate  change, pollution, outdoor recreation, cultural heritage and the polar  regions. Important waste policy instruments include legislation, taxes and  economic incentives targeted at the municipalities, business and industry.  As a result, there is considerable variation between municipalities based on  population, resources and local conditions. Waste regulation resides with  the Ministry of the Climate and the Environment; the laws that mandate  actual measures are enforced by a number of other authorities subsumed  under several ministries . Governance arrangements  present a high level of complication that produce inconsistent approaches  across the country. Inter-municipal companies represent the most common approach to  collection and processing with 334 municipalities out of a total of 428  municipalities cooperating to organise their waste services. Some  S. M. JONES 149 municipalities support competitive tendering, resulting in out-of-munici - pality provision, either by public companies from other municipalities or  by private companies . Waste manage - ment is one of the municipal services with the highest degree of variation  in organisational forms, both public and private, delivering Norwegian  public services. The Norwegian government recognises a need for a  greater focus on waste prevention especially for food waste, construction  and industrial waste, electrical products and textiles. Scholars argue that  Norwegian government initiatives are relatively weak as they aim to a  small degree at directly preventing waste . In an  attempt to focus waste policies in the direction of circular initiatives the  Norwegian government released the Strategy for Green Competitiveness  in  2017. This strategy contains basic ideas and principles emerging from the  2017 White Paper that reflect EU circular economy objectives to form the  basis of future Norwegian policies, as well as a description of its core  aspects, including the circular economy as one contribution to the coun - try’s economic competitiveness rather than environmental sustainability. 7.4.2   Policy Actors This aspect of the framework utilises the Sabatier’s Advocacy Coalition  Framework  to consider relevant actors attempts at influencing  political priority for policy change. These determinants focus on coalitions  of government, and non-government actors that engage in coordinated  activity to promote the common cause they want to advance. Advocacy  coalitions can consist of elected and agency officials, interest group lead - ers, and researchers who share a particular views and values that draw them  together in an attempt to influence waste policy. Leadership by policy  entrepreneurs helps to unite a policy community through forming a link  between formation and maintenance of advocacy coalitions (Mintrom and  Phillipa 2009 ). As policy actors, entrepreneurs attempt to assemble and  maintain coalitions to support specific policy ideas, which prove to be  valuable political resources during discussions of policy change (Smith  1991 ). Political parties are an important feature of policy debate in parlia - mentary systems as jurisdictions are influenced by agendas established by  the major political parties. Civil society mobilisation, in the form of grass - roots movements as policy actors, often arises in reaction to perceived  social injustices and environmental problems .  Scholars such as Baker et  al.  argue for the need to recognise 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   150 industry mobilisation as potential determinant of government acting to  change specific policy. An economic focus in policy change by govern - ments works in favour of powerful industry stakeholders as advocacy coali - tions who can mobilise to continue to support voluntary market-based  approaches, as a reflection of economic ideas in structuring policy choices  . In Belgium, there is a high degree of cooperation between municipali - ties as key policy actors at the regional level. For example, the VVSG is an  association of all municipalities in Flanders. As a key policy actor, it repre - sents their interests on sustainability issues with the regional government,  and negotiates on their behalf with government and with recognised bod - ies of producers with producer responsibility obligations. OVAM is the  waste management agency that works as a policy entrepreneur as it also  coordinates this cooperation, working through Flemish municipalities and  intermunicipal waste management organisations in negotiations with  administration, cabinet officials and industry. OVAM has become a promi - nent stakeholder on municipal solid waste management for the regional  government and official departments. In the past, OVAM has made repre - sentations to the EU on landfill mining issues, including waste recovery  opportunities . OVAM’s 2017 implementation plan for  household waste raised the issue of reducing consumption but provided  no clear ideas on how it could be done. The Interregional Packaging  Commission  undertakes supervision and advisory roles to the  regional waste authorities, including OVAM. The IVC-CIE has contracted  Fost Plus to coordinate with packaging manufacturers to collect and pro - cess packaging from households and Val-I-Pac has been contracted to pro - cess industrial and commercial packaging waste. Fost Plus has become a  key policy actor representing industry with membership including major  packaging firms such as Unilever, Coca Cola, Carrefour, Total, Proctor  and Gamble and Danone . Fost Plus has helped to mobil - ise industry in promoting circular approaches and regularly makes repre - sentations to governments on what industry requires in terms of policy  change. Recent issues have included resisting the introduction of a con - tainer deposit scheme, promoting waste sorting schemes in public spaces,  establishing awards for sustainable packaging and strategies to reduce free  riding by packaging companies . The government focus  on recycling tends to work in favour of Fost Plus and its members as it  encourages more consumption and programmes that support some of the  highest rates of recycling in the EU.  In its 2018 Annual Report that  S. M. JONES 151 focuses on advancing to a circular economy, Fost Plus make this ambition  clear: ‘Our ambition for the years ahead is clear: to collect more packaging  waste, to achieve higher recycling rates and to continue developing effi - cient and sustainable systems’ . According to surveys among Norwegian members of parliament, the  nature of political representation in Norway means that lobby groups, as  policy actors, push their agenda through individual MPs. Rommetvedt   argued that 80–90% of the MPs agree that interest group lobbying  furnishes them with alternative information and counter expertise and,  therefore, improves their ability to control the executive’s follow-up of the  resolutions and intentions of the Stortinget.  Norway is a constitutional  monarchy, with legislative power being vested in its unicameral parlia - ment. In 2020, the parliament of Norway consists of minor parties rang - ing from conservative, centre right/left, green and Christian democrats.  Since 2019, the Right Party, the Progressive Party, and the Left and the  Christian People’s Party have reached an agreement to establish a majority  government. Such a diverse range of political actors will contribute to  challenges in gaining political agreement to prioritise policy action. At the  committee level, there are opportunities for political parties to participate  in the decisions that help determine government policy. The Standing  Committee for Energy and the Environment has an interest in the circular  economy and waste management; it has 17 members, with representation  from each of the eight political parties . These institu - tional arrangements with diverse political party interests add to the com - plexity of the policymaking process. Norway has been identified as a rather  unusual case with regard to the relationship between NGOs and policy - makers . Dryzek et al.  observed a close  relationship between these groups and the state in Norway, in a system  that values consensus. Environment-focused groups are able to participate  in the committee stage of policy development. In many respects, this  reduces the watchdog and attention raising role usually played by such  groups. The experience of the WWF in arguing through committees for a  ban on single-use plastics in Norway has been long running. Some prog - ress was achieved in 2020 when the government agreed to impose a lim - ited EPR scheme for these plastics . As a result of the institutional context, municipal governments are key  policy actors in Norway in achieving sustainability goals. Research suggest  that there has been some progress in many areas of environmental policy,  in particular regarding pollution and waste. For example, the part of 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   152 household waste which is recycled has increased from close to 0–40% in  some municipalities. Such results highlight the potential influence of  municipal governments in this aspect of waste policy. Unfortunately,  household waste per person has increased by more than 50%, and the  trend is projected to increase over the next decade (Espigares et al. 2016 ,  652). Furthermore, with respect to sustainable development, increasing  conflicts of interests over the use of land and natural resources in Norway  have been an issue in terms of safeguarding public interests in land-use  planning, including environmental protection. Research on sustainability  in the Oslo Kommune is one example of the dilemmas faced. There tends  to be a low level of demand for sustainability as a value when compared  with projects promoting economic development (Andersen and Skrede  2017 ). While the municipality’s legal, or formal, authorities plan for a  sustainable development, powerful policy actors such as real estate devel - opers are able to ensure that the notion of sustainability fits within a model  that ensures profitability over environmental concerns. Such attitudes flow  into waste management ideas whereby Oslo is investing heavily in both  recycling facilities and incineration as economic opportunities for the city  . One challenge to waste recycling and re-   circulation of materials is the partial lock-in that can be caused through  municipal commitments to, and investments in, incineration for energy  recovery with Denmark, Sweden and Norway. While this may reduce  municipal waste companies’ commitment to waste prevention and mate - rial recycling, it gives the impression that waste is being managed effectively. Norway’s largest waste industry group, Avfall Norge, is a key policy  actor as a trade association for waste management and recycling compa - nies. It has 100 municipal and intermunicipal solid waste organisations;  approximately 70 associated members cover about 95% of Norway’s  municipalities, directly or via an inter-municipal organisation (Avfall  Norge 2020a ). The association has mobilised industry action and has lob - bied the government to do more about coordination between agencies  and strengthening regulations to prevent contaminated construction  waste entering the waste stream. One consequence of this lack of coordi - nation by governments is inconsistency across departments in their pur - chasing regimes that fail to ensure that stronger requirements of suppliers  and manufacturers meet EPR requirements . Avfall  Norge has also been pressuring the government to make a decision on the  location of new landfill sites and strengthening regulations on hazardous  waste. The association has been most critical of government inaction on  S. M. JONES 153 waste regulations and for allowing the continuation of conditions that  support free riding of EPR schemes by packaging companies. In other  compelling critiques, Avfall Norge argues that the legislative weaknesses  identified will prevent Norway advancing towards a circular economy  . The government position on the policymaking pro - cess suggest that they believe policy actors have better insight into the  opportunities and challenges facing specific waste-related industries. As a  result, the government claims that it has been ‘strengthening cooperation  in the process industry sector between business and industry partners, the  public administration and researchers, and has established a long-term  strategic forum called Prosess21 ’. Early initiatives  suggest that this approach includes stakeholders from the industrial and  research sectors, Innovation Norway, the Research Council and the  Norwegian Environment Agency. Results suggests that Norwegian minis - tries have been undertaking consultation; however, they tend to focus on  their own evidence over other expert sources . 7.4.3   Policy Ideas Waste management is currently viewed largely through the economic ideas  that frame waste as a resource that needs to be managed for its value. As a  key objective of the circular economy approach, effective management of  waste is seen as an important contributor to long-term sustainable eco - nomic growth. When policymakers frame a problem, it can dictate whether  and how it will be treated. Ideational processes help provide the explana - tion for a dynamic approach to policy change, in which change, or conti - nuity, is possible through ideas and discursive interaction in politics  . Ideas have a role in helping to shape the policy  agenda. Whether waste is framed in economic or environmental terms will  also influence which stakeholders seek to contribute to influencing the  policy change. For example, how a government frames waste as a problem  will shape the way it will be examined, and the potential solutions pursued.  Agenda setting is about a government recognising that a problem is a  ‘public’ problem worthy of attention. It is often considered the most criti - cal stage in the policy process, as limited resources mean that governments  can only prioritise a limited number of public problems at any particular  time . There is more likelihood of policy change if an  issue reaches the government’s policy agenda.7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   154 As a member of the EU, the approaches taken by Belgian governments  largely reflect the ideas of the Towards a circular economy: A zero waste  programme for Europe , emphasising the link between circular economy  and waste management. Belgian policy documents regard the economic  gains of the circular economy and the future prosperity of the country  rather than sustainability or environmental benefits . In  the majority of instances, the Belgian approaches have been in accordance  with focusing on promoting recycling and reducing landfill. The underly - ing idea has been one of self-sufficiency and the ‘recovery’ of waste as a  resource . The focus on sorting at the household level is  designed to improve the quality of recycling outputs and reduce disposal  by transferring. Similarly, the ban on landfill and the limitations on incin - eration are designed to raise the volume of material capable of being recy - cled. From 2008 to 2015, OVAM emphasised the environmental benefits  of the management of household waste through the Implementation Plan  for Environmentally Responsible Waste Management . In 2016, the focus  moved towards emphasising waste prevention, more reuse and raising tar - gets for the collection of packaging. The responsibility for packaging has  been a key requirement of industry in Belgium, and VAL-PAC and Fost-   Plus collect and pr ocess packaging waste. There have been some concerns  expressed regarding the changes in EU ideas about waste management.  The EU Directive 2018/851 on waste is potentially problematic for the  future of the Flemish waste management. The recycling targets under this  directive are much lower than what is already achieved in Flanders, so it  may not give Flanders incentives to improve its recycling rates or to keep  them at their existing level. The EU Directive also redefines some incin - erators as ‘recovery’ rather than ‘disposal’, which is likely to push incinera - tion further to the detriment of recycling. This new idea is contrary to the  long-standing view in Belgium that prefers recovery to disposal. The Norwegian government released the Strategy for Green  Competitiveness  in 2017 as a key milestone and a catalyst for moving  Norway towards a circular economy. As the EU is Norway’s largest export  market, the EU initiative for a transition to a circular economy is seen to  have implications for Norwegian business and industry. The Strategy   points to the necessity for companies to prepare to compete in the context  of strict rules on resource efficiency. Business has been encouraged to take  more responsibility for products along the whole value chain. The EU  initiatives to establish a circular economy have been framed by the  Norwegian government as primarily both a waste management problem  S. M. JONES 155 and an economic opportunity for local companies that can offer ‘new  smart, green solutions and technology that will improve resource effi - ciency’ . The result has been a close relationship  between industry and government in terms of framing environment policy  arguments in favour of business interests. A long-term preference by the  Norwegian government has been to establish voluntary agreements with  industry. The government sets regulatory boundaries and expectations  and requires industry participant to achieve specific targets within agreed  time frames. The most successful, and widely known, EPR arrangement is  the recycling of approximately 97% of plastic bottles since 2011 by using  a nationwide EPR-based bottle deposit scheme. The scheme is seen to  demonstrate the responsiveness of business to such incentives and the will - ingness of the Norwegian public to participate in reverse vending arrange - ments if they are easily accessible. Voluntary schemes in Norway reflect the framing of waste as an issue  for industry. These schemes have been the preference since the early  1990s, and there has been research critiquing their effectiveness for some  time. The weaknesses will have implications for substantial circular initia - tives should they be adopted. Critics of the Norwegian approach to EPR  point to the voluntary participation resulting in distortion in the market.  Free riders who benefit from the scheme without contributing to its cost  are able to sell their products at a lower cost. For Avfall Norge, this has  been the underlying weakness of the Norwegian schemes that has not  been addressed through stronger regulation .  Effective EPR schemes are seen to be fundamental to the success of circu - lar economy as they have potential to improve sustainability of products,  reduce reliance on disposal technologies and lower costs. Harmonisation  of approaches to EPR across the EU is proposed as an important first step  that could lead to reducing the impacts of the current weaknesses experi - enced in individual countries . 7.4.4   Problem Characteristics This dimension of the framework points to the aspects of a policy problem  prompting policy change. Kingdon  argues that governments have  a long list of problems that they could attend to and that decision-makers  pay attention to some problems and ignore others. ‘Sometimes their  attention is affected by more or less a systemic indicator of a problem. At  other times, a dramatic event seizes their attention, or feedback from the 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   156 operation of existing programmes suggests all is not well’ . In  the case of waste, we have seen through the case studies that current indi - cators show that consumption is producing volumes of waste beyond the  capacity of waste management systems to cope. The current crisis has  revealed that recycling has been failing to achieve expected targets as a  result of poor management practices and ineffective policy responses to  establish a market for recycled materials, particularly plastics. In the case of  the circular economy, the crisis relating to recycling practices in many  OECD countries has created a situation where governments have been  forced to respond. As a result, the focus on waste management as a key  ‘problem’ for the transition to a circular economy has been driven by the  calls for government action to respond to the crisis situation. What should  be done about managing waste has become the central problem rather  than how to prevent waste in the first place. Kingdon  suggests that any given policy problem has an improved  chance of rising in the policy agenda as a priority if coupled with another  pressing pre-existing problem. The experiences of Belgium and Norway  suggest that the combination of a crisis situation and the problem of  missed economic opportunities has reinforced the need for a policy  response. Viewing waste as an industry implies that waste diversion is the  preferred solution to the problem of managing increasing volumes of  waste, which benefits vested interests seeking to expand economic oppor- tunities in recycling, landfill and energy .  Ignoring consumption curtails the capacity of waste prevention plans to  reduce the generation of waste. The evidence from the case studies sug - gests that there are some improvements in the management of waste; for  example, there have been increasing rates of recycling by industry in  Belgium. Belgian regional governments have been effective in establishing waste  management policies that reflect aspects of waste as a problem in the con - text of a circular economy. They have been comparatively successful in  recycling waste as they have been willing to apply a suite of policy instru - ments that include compulsory requirements and financial incentives to  encourage behaviour change. Legislated stewardship requirements for  packaging producers have also contributed to high levels of recycling both  household and business waste. In addition, the Belgian experience shows  that it is very important that such instruments be supported by a system of  levies. The case study has focused particularly on the experience of the  Flanders region as it appears to have taken waste policy action as a policy  S. M. JONES 157 priority over time. For Flanders, the waste management policy encom - passes targets for environmental improvement, economic growth and  social development, all of which are in harmony with circular economy  principles. The government of Flanders also wants to uncouple the pro - duction of waste from increasing consumption. Since 2010, Flanders,  through OVAM, has continued to set ambitious per capita waste reduc - tion targets. This objective remains unchanged even in the context of  social and economic changes that are seeing increasing numbers of smaller  households, increasing consumption and the reduction of the average life  cycle of products, increases the production of waste materials  . The 2019 Nordic Council of Ministers report shows that municipal  waste generation in Norway is higher than the OECD or EU15 average,  although the reported household waste fraction corresponds to the OECD  average . While there have been some important  achievements in the recycling of certain elements of plastic waste and  e-waste, more needs to be done in other sources of waste if Norway con - tinues to deal with the challenges of managing waste in the context of EU  directives. Despite this, long standing issues continue such as waste pollu - tion entering ecological systems, like marine litter and microplastics in the  Norwegian Sea . The export of hazardous waste from  Norway increased from 505 thousand tonnes in 2012 to 1042 thousand  tonnes in 2014. Policy actors such as Avfall Norge have been lobbying for  government interventions in this important area of waste (Avfall Norge  2019c ). Only France, with 1526 thousand tonnes, has a higher rate than  Norway. These are the only recorded figures provided by Norway in a  context where EU countries report annually. To compare this figure,  Belgium’s  export of hazardous waste  in 2012 was 631 thousand tonnes and 637 thousand tonnes in 2014  . Reasons for the export increase from Norway include an  insufficient combustion capacity and a ban on the landfilling of biodegrad - able waste, coupled with changes in economic and market factors  . The experience of Belgium and Norway also highlights some weak  spots, preventing a more comprehensive transition from a linear to a cir - cular economy. Each region shows the challenge of taking policy action to  preventing the growth of waste through reducing consumption. Action in  this area is a cornerstone of the circular economy as it prevents the use of  raw materials entering the waste cycle; however, there appears to be a lack 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   158 of commitment in both countries to seriously challenge consumption as a  policy priority. The revised Waste Framework Directive   strengthens this requirement but does not introduce binding quantified  targets for waste prevention. Circular economy necessitates redesigning  material life cycles to reduce the volume of materials used. This is a diffi - cult area for government action due to the complexities of waste as a pol - icy problem. There is a tension between promoting economic growth and  taking the, seemingly counterintuitive, action to change behaviour and  lower levels of consumption. Belgium and Norway have some of the high - est net financial wealth by households in the EU .  Research suggests that as country becomes richer, the composition of its  waste changes. With more money comes more packaging, imports, elec - tronic waste and broken toys and appliances .  During the global financial crisis from 2008 to 2013, Belgian private con - sumption still recorded an average annual growth rate of about 1%, well  above the average pace that was observed in neighbouring countries.  Decades of learned consumption based on linear approaches will require  increased political priority to establish long-term effective policy measures  previously off limits to governments in market-based economies. 7.5  ConClusion The political priority framework highlights some fundamental challenges  for advancing a circular economy. The experience of Belgium and Norway  reveals the complexities evident in multilevel systems that provide added  challenges particularly in the area of waste management as a key element  of advancing circular approaches. The material covered in this book has  produced important insights for stakeholders in other multilevel systems  intending to move towards a circular economy. After considering the  determinants of according these issues a higher priority for policy change  outlined in the framework, we have some understanding of the complexi - ties that may emerge in transitioning from the linear to the circular econ - omy. Political priority will be required for policy change to support acting  on the key objectives beyond recycling and waste management. Negotiating  the idiosyncrasies of policymaking around circular issues in individual  political contexts will also play an important role in determining policy  change once political priority has been achieved. The complexity of waste  as a policy problem contributes to the barriers and opportunities of achiev - ing priority on the policy agenda. This will have implications for advancing  S. M. JONES 159 a circular economy as the sustainable management of waste is a central  element of a transition from the established linear approaches. Achieving effective circular economy objectives requires a political pri - ority to implement policies that address all stages of the materials life cycle.  One area common to government efforts to promote a circular economy  is the lack of focus on reducing consumption. Serious action to stem the  flow of increasing volumes of waste is becoming a critical issue. Challenges  need to be faced by individual consumers and industry as the generators  of waste. They must assume a high degree of responsibility for placing  contaminants into the recycling system that the waste management system  must deal with . The Government of Flanders has set a  general goal of reducing consumption, without specifying what this actu - ally means or entails. Norway seems to have avoided the issue altogether  as it is not mentioned in documents related to the circular economy. The  Strategy for Green Competitiveness  only mentions ‘encouraging green con - sumption’—not reducing consumption. Attention to this aspect of waste  management will be critical to advancing the circular model. Both Belgium  and Norway show that as consumption levels continue to rise there is a  corresponding increase in the volumes of waste. Neither country has suc - cessfully broken the link between consumption and waste. The crisis with  plastic waste and the consequent threat to marine ecosystems provides a  valuable opportunity to frame that debate about consumption.  Policymakers need to remember that, largely as a result of the waste crisis,  the issue of trust in government infuses debates about sustainability and  recycling. The framework shows that ideational framing will be an impor - tant element in contributing to a policy priority for change. Policy actors  can contribute to framing aspects of waste policy that support the need for  policy change. Government focus has been on framing recycling as the right thing to  do in terms of limiting environmental damage. This has largely been  directed at consumers in Belgium who carry the burden through house - hold sorting requirements. Framing waste as a valuable resource not to be  lost has also contributed to the introduction of EPR schemes in both  countries that require limited responsibilities on packaging manufacturers  to support recycling. Further work needs to be undertaken to establish  ideas about framing consumption in such a way that it becomes part of the  policy agenda. Progress on addressing the transition to a circular economy  and achieving UN Sustainable Development Goal 12, ‘to promote sus - tainable production and consumption’, will depend on changing (or 7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   160 limiting) human behaviour, which must include restricting consumption.  As Hood  suggests, we need to place value on ‘conspicuous non-   consumption and r e-use’ if we are to advance circular approaches. Even if  societies determine that restrictions need to be imposed, individual atti - tudes and beliefs about restricting consumption will be important to  achieving long-term reductions. Research reveals that ‘changing con - sumption behavior will depend on changing intentions, attitudes, expecta - tions and perceived control, all of which are malleable and can be targeted  either individually or a population level’ . Research  suggests that government policies can have significant effects on low car - bon consumption behaviour, among which policy factors include informa - tion feedback and information cue ,  economic policies, technical policies and mandatory administrative regula - tions . The Household Preferences for Reducing  GHG Emissions  project reveals that in the EU, at least, targeted  regulations can be viewed positively for ‘driving changes in attitudes,  norms, or practices could shape consumption .  In fact, the authors report that ‘we may have to rely on forced consump - tion changes in order to buy us time to take advantage of technology to  replace many high energy consuming products and services, such as motor  vehicles and international travel’ . Other research shows that ‘tar - geting specific domains of consumption will be far more difficult and  costly than targeting consumption in general, although it remains an open  question which approach general or specific is more affective at changing  both intentions and behavior’ . Such issues should  become a key element of future research on political priority for pol - icy change. Given this understanding, the following scenario can be proposed as a  summation of the current circumstances in respect of government policy  advancing the circular economy as a solution to the waste crisis:  1. The pr oblems of pursuing all of the objectives of the circular econ - omy are difficult for governments to develop an effective response;  key aspects are phenomena with which governments are reluctant to  deal, for example reducing consumption.  2. Key policy actors want to be seen to be doing something (they have  made public statements suppor ting a transition to a circular econ - omy, developed plans and strategies that appear to commit  to change). S. M. JONES 161  3. Some of the policy actors ar e driven by strong ideological commit - ment to promote sustainability and economic development as nec - essary conditions for the future. Others are driven by vested interests  that recognise economic opportunities.  4. The r esult is a series of actions that are presented as policy change,  for example recycling and waste to energy proposals are promoted.  These actions may equally be the thrashing around of a system that  needs to be seen as active but does not really know what to do. To  support their cause, policy actors use rational action language to  support what is essentially limited action. referen Ces ABC 2019. Canada to ban single use plastic bags . https://www.abc.net.au/btn/ newsbreak/canada-to-ban-single-use-plastics/11198350 Andersen, B., & Skrede, J. . Planning for a sustainable Oslo: The challenge  of turning urban theory into practice. Local Environment, 22 , 581–594. Avfall Norge. . Circular economy are you getting impatient?  Retrieved from  https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/10-  tiltak-  du- kan- starte-  med-  i- dag Avfall Norge. . Releasing environmental demands from the Storting—But  they are not alone . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/ slappe-  miljøkrav-  fra- stortinget-  men-  de- er- ikke- alene Avfall Norge. . Lack of regulations leads to environmental crime . Retrieved  from https://www.avfallnorge.no/bransjen/nyheter/manglende-  regelverk-    fører-  til- miljøkriminalitet Avfall Norge. . About . Retrieved from https://www.avfallnorge.no/ Avfall Norge. . The environment agency proposes to change the regulations  for plastic packaging . Retrieved from https://avfallnorge.no/bransjen/ nyheter/miljødirektoratet-  foreslår-  å- endre-  regelverket-  for- plastemballasje Bachus, K., & Spillemaeckers, S. . Inclusive governance or incrementalism?  The choice of a sustainable development governance model for Flanders. In  Sustainable development and subnational governments  . London:  Palgrave Macmillan. Baker, P., Gill, T., Friel, S., Carey, G., & Kay, A. . Generating political prior - ity for regulatory interventions targeting obesity prevention: An Australian case  study. Social Science & Medicine, 177 , 141–149. Belgium. . Ensemble faisons tourner l’économie en développant  l’économie circulaire en Belgique (Let’s make the economy work by devel - oping the circular economy in Belgium). Retrieved from https://www.bel- gium.be/en/economy/sustainable_development/sustainable_economy/ innovative_economic_models/circular_economy7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   162 Blaug, R., Horner, L., & Lekhi, R. . Public value, citizen expectations and  user commitment . London: The Work Foundation. Brussels. . Brussels capital region circular economy strategy . Retrieved from  http://www.circulareconomy.brussels/a-  propos/?lang=en Bulkeley, H., Watson, M., & Hudson, R. . Modes of governing municipal  waste. Environment and Planning A, 39 , 2733–2753. Bulkeley, H., & Gregson, N. . Crossing the threshold: municipal waste  policy and household waste generation. Environment and planning A,  41, 929–945. Campbell-Johnston, K., ten Cate, J., Elfering-Petrovic, M., & Gupta, J. .  City level circular transitions: Barriers and limits in Amsterdam, Utrecht and  The Hague. Journal of Cleaner Production, 235 , 1232–1239. Ding, Z., Jiang, X., Liu, Z., Long, R., Xu, Z., & Cao, Q. . Factors affecting  low-carbon consumption behavior of urban residents: A comprehensive review.  Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 132 , 3–15. Dryzek, J. S., Downes, D., Hunold, C., Schlosberg, D., & Hernes, H. K. .  Green states and social movements: Environmentalism in the United States,  United Kingdom, Germany, and Norway . OUP Oxford. Dubois, G., Sovacool, B., Aall, C., Nilsson, M., Barbier, C., Herrmann, A.,  Bruyère, S., Andersson, C., Skold, B., Nadaud, F., & Dorner, F. . It  starts at home? Climate policies targeting household consumption and behav - ioural decisions are key to low-carbon futures. Energy Research & Social Science,  52, 144–158. EEA. . Recycling municipal waste . Retrieved from https://www.eea. europa.eu/airs/2018/resource-  efficiency-  and-  low-  carbon-  economy/ recycling-  of- municipal-  waste Espigares, J.L.N., Buck, M., Tarifa, G.M., Segura, J.A.M., Midtbø, T., López,  C.P., & Saethre, M.A., 2016. Municipal services in the framework of LA21: A  comparison between Norway and Spain. In Tiziana Russo-Spenaand Cristina  Mele , Proceedings: 26th Annual RESER Conference 2016 . Naples–Italy. EU. . Directive  2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the  Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste. Retrieved  from https://www.eea.europa.eu/policy-  documents/directive-  eu- 2018-    851- of European Parliament. . Turning waste into a resource: Moving towards a  ‘circular economy’ . Retrieved from http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/ etudes/BRIE/2014/545704/EPRS_BRI545704_REV1_EN.pdf Eurostat. . 487 kg of municipal waste generated per person . Retrieved from  https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-  eurostat-  news/-  / DDN-  20190123-  1 Ferronato, N., & Torretta, V. . Waste mismanagement in developing coun - tries: A review of global issues. International Journal of Environmental Research  and Public Health, 16 , 1060. S. M. JONES 163 Forcinio, H. . Prioritising sustainable packaging: Pharmaceutical companies  work towards a circular economy . Retrieved from http://www.pharmtech.com/ prioritizing-  sustainable-  packaging Fost Plus. . Annual report 2017: A new impulse for the management of  household packaging waste . Brussels. Belgium. Fost Plus. . Annual report 2018: A new look at the circular economy .  Retrieved from http://com.fostplus.be/annualreport2018eng/welcome/ Hanssen, G. S., Hovik, S., Indset, M., Klausen, J. E., & Stokke, K. B. .  Implementing EUs water framework directive in Norway: Can the New River  Basin districts ensure environmental policy integration? International Journal  of Water Governance., 4 , 1–26. Hartley, K., van Santen, R., & Kirchherr, J. . Policies for transitioning  towards a circular economy: Expectations from the European Union .  Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 155 , 104634. Hermansen, E. A., McNeill, D., Kasa, S., & Rajão, R. . Co-operation or  co-optation? NGOs’ roles in Norway’s international climate and forest initia - tive. Forests, 8 , 64. Hood, B. . Make recycled goods covetable. Nature News,  531, 438–440. Hoornweg, D., Bhada-Tata, P., & Kennedy, C. . Environment: Waste pro - duction must peak this century. Nature News, 502 , 615. IVC-CIE. . Cooperation Agreement of 04-11-2008 on the prevention and  management of packaging waste . Retrieved from https://www.ivcie.be/en/ John, P. . Theories of policy change and variation reconsidered: A prospec - tus for the political economy of public policy. Policy Science, 51 , 1–16. Kangas, O., Niemelä, M., & Varjonen, S. . When and why do ideas matter?  The influence of framing on opinion formation and policy change. European  Political Science Review, 6 , 73–92. Kingdon, J. . Agendas, alternatives, and public policies  . New York:  Harper Collins. Leal Filho, W., Saari, U., Fedoruk, M., Iital, A., Moora, H., Klöga, M., &  Voronova, V. . An overview of the problems posed by plastic products  and the role of extended producer responsibility in Europe. Journal of Cleaner  Production, 214 , 550–558. Malinauskaite, J., Jouhara, H., Czajczyn ́ska, D., Stanchev, P., Katsou, E.,  Rostkowski, P., Thorne, R.  J., Colon, J., Ponsá, S., Al-Mansour, F., &  Anguilano, L. . Municipal solid waste management and waste-to-energy  in the context of a circular economy and energy recycling in Europe. Energy,  141, 2013–2044. Milios, L. . Advancing to a circular economy: Three essential ingredients  for a comprehensive policy mix. Sustainability Science, 13 , 861–878. Minelgaite ̇, A., & Liobikiene ̇, G. . The problem of not waste sorting behav - iour, comparison of waste sorters and non-sorters in European Union: Cross-   cultural analysis. Science of The Total Environment, 672 , 174–182.7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   164 Minne, G., Basselier, R., & Langenus, G. . Why has Belgian private con - sumption growth been so moderate in recent years? National Bank of Belgium:  Economic Review, June. Retrieved from https://www.nbb.be/doc/ts/publi- cations/economicreview/2019/ecorevi2019_h3.pdf. Mintrom, M., & Phillipa, N. . Policy entrepreneurship and policy change.  Policy Studies Journal, 37 , 649–667. Nilsson, F., & Harring, N. . The large-scale collective action dilemma of  recycling: Exploring the role of trust . Working Paper: 15. Quality of Government  Institute. University of Gothenberg. Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment . . Update of  the integrated management of the Norwegian Sea . Retrieved from https:// www.regjeringen.no/en/dokumenter/meld.-  st.- 35- 20162017/id2547988/ Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment . . Better  growth, lower emissions—The Norwegian government’s strategy for green competi - tiveness . Retrieved from https://www.regjeringen.no/en/dokumenter/bedre-   vekst-  lavere-  utslipp%2D%2Dregjeringens-  strategi-  for- gronn-  konkurransekraft-   engelsk/id2575420/ Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment . . Visions and  ambitions for a circular economy in Norway . Retrieved from https://www. regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/visions-  and- ambitions-  for- a- circular-  economy-  in-  norway/id2740057/ OECD. . Trust in Government .  https://www .oecd.org/gov/trust-  in-  gover nment.htm Oslo Kommune. . Circular economy and waste management . Retrieved  from https://www.oslo.kommune.no/politics-  and- administration/green-   oslo/best-  practices/circular-  economy-  in- practice/ OVAM. . Implementation Plan for household waste and comparable indus - trial waste—Summary . Retrieved from https://www.ovam.be/sites/default/ files/atoms/files/UitvoeringsplanHuishoudelijkenGelijkaardigBedrijfsafval_ LR_2017_Engelstalig.pdf OVAM. . Circular Flanders: Together towards a circular economy. Kick-   off statement. Retrieved from https://vlaanderen-  circulair.be/src/Frontend/ Files/userfiles/files/Circular%20Flanders%20Kick-  Off%20Statement.pdf OVAM. . World resources form: Events and symposia . Retrieved from  https://www.ovamenglish.be/events-  symposia Papineschi, J. Hogg, D. Chowdhury, T. Durrant, C., & Thomson, A. .  Analysis of Nordic regulatory framework and its effect on waste prevention and  recycling in the region . Nordic Council of Ministers. Retrieved from https:// www.norden.org/en/publication/analysis-  nordic-  regulatory-  framework-  and-  its- effect-  waste-  prevention-  and- recycling Pollans, L. . Trapped in trash: ‘Modes of governing’ and barriers to transi - tioning to sustainable waste management. Environment and Planning A.,  49, 2300–2323. S. M. JONES 165 Ranta, V., Aarikka-Stenroos, L., Ritala, P., & Mäkinen, S. J. . Exploring  institutional drivers and barriers of the circular economy: A cross-regional   comparison of China, the US, and Eur ope. Resources, Conservation and  Recycling, 135 , 70–82. Rommetvedt, H. . The rise of the Norwegian parliament: Studies in  Norwegian parliamentary government . Routledge. Ross, A., & Dovers, S. . Making the harder yards: Environment policy inte - gration in Australia. Australian Journal of Public Administration,  67, 245–260. Sabatier, P. A. . The advocacy coalition framework: Revisions and relevance  for Europe. Journal of European Public Policy, 5 , 98–130. Santor, D. A., Fethi, I., & McIntee, S. E. . Restricting our consumption of  material goods: An application of the theory of planned behaviour. Sustainability,  12, 2–13. Saphores, J. D. M., Ogunseitan, O. A., & Shapiro, A. A. . Willingness to  engage in a pro-environmental behaviour: An analysis of e-waste recycling  based on a national survey of US households. Resources, Conservation and  Recycling, 60 , 49–63. Smith, A., & Seyfang, G. . Constructing grassroots innovations for sustain - ability. Global Environmental Change, 23 , 827–829. Smith, J. A. . The idea brokers: Think tanks and the rise of the new policy elite .  New York: The Free Press. Steiner-Khamsi, G., Karseth, B., & Baek, C. . From science to politics:  Commissioned reports and their political translation into white papers. Journal  of Education Policy, 35 , 119–144. Stortinget. . The Standing Committee on Energy and the Environment .  Retrieved from https://www.stortinget.no/en/In-  English/Standing-   Commitees/The-  Standing-  Committee-  on- Energy-  and- the- Environment/?ta b=MembersCommittee#primaryfilter Thornton, T. . Don’t just blame government and business for the recycling  crisis—It begins with us. The Conversation . Retrieved from https://thecon- versation.com/dont-  just- blame-  government-  and- business-  for- the- recycling-   crisis-  it- begins-  with-  us- 121241 Torsteinsen, H., & Genugten, M. . Municipal waste management in  Norway and the Netherlands—From in-house provision to inter-municipal  cooperation. In S. Kuhlman & G. Bouckaert , Local public sector reforms  in times of crisis: National trajectories and international comparisons . London:  Palgrave Macmillan. United Nations Environment Programme . . Critical metals for  future sustainable technologies and their recycling potential . Retrieved from  https://www.ctc-  n.org/resources/critical-  metals-  future-  sustainable-  technologies-    and- their-  recycling-  potential7 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSIONS: UNSUST AINABLE STATUS QUO?   166 United Nations Environment Program . . Global waste manage - ment outlook . Online: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?pag e=view&type=400&nr=2338&menu=1515 Valenzuela, F., & Böhm, S. . Against wasted politics: A critique of the cir - cular economy. Ephemera: Theory & Politics in Organization, 17 , 23–60. Verhoest, K., Demuzere, S., & Rommel, J. . Belgium and it’s regions. In  K. Verhoest, S. Van Thiel, G. Bouckaert, & P. Laegreid , Government  agencies: Practices and lessons from 30 countries  . London: Palgrave  Macmillan. Wallonia. . Circular Wallonia: la Wallonie se dote d’une stratégie ambitieuse  de déploiement de l’économie circulaire. Retrieved from https://borsus.wall- onie.be/home/presse%2D%2Dactualites/publications/circular-   wallonia%2D%2D-  la- wallonie-  se- dote-  dune-  strategie-  ambitieuse-  de-  deploiement-  de- leconomie-  circulaire.publicationfull.html World Bank. . Global waste to grow by 70% by 2050 unless urgent action  is taken: World Bank report . Retrieved from https://www.worldbank.org/ en/news/press-  release/2018/09/20/global-  waste-  to- grow-  by- 70- percent-   by- 2050-  unless-  urgent-  action-  is- taken-  world-  bank-  report World Wildlife Fund . . Requires manufacturer responsibility for all  plastic . Retrieved from https://www.wwf.no/nyheter/krever-  produsentansvar-    for- all- plast Wu, X., Ramesh, M., Howlett, M., & Fritzen, S.  A. . The public policy  primer: Managing the policy process . London: Routledge. S. M. JONES 167 © The Author, under exclusive license to Springer Nature  Switzerland AG 2021 S. M. Jones, Advancing a Circular Economy ,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66564-7Index A Advocacy Coalition Framework  , 70, 149 Agenda setting, 71, 74, 153 Arm’s length government  agencies, 147 Avfall Norge, 114, 118, 122,  129, 132–134, 152, 153,  155, 157 B Barrier, 7, 42, 51–54, 56, 61, 63, 67,  82, 134, 158 Basel convention, 17 Behaviour change, 19, 56, 102, 156 Belgian government, 89, 91,  147, 154 Belgium, viii, 8, 82, 89–106, 126,  129, 146, 147, 150,  154, 156–159 Bottle deposit scheme, 120, 121,  131, 155 Brussels Capital Region, 90–93, 147C Capture, 133 Centre for Environmental Law  , 23, 24 China, 2, 3, 16, 17, 30, 44, 52,  53, 56, 101 Circular Economy Action Plan, 17 Circular Economy Monitoring  Framework, 76 Circular indicators, 76 Civil society, 27, 71, 72, 117, 149 Coalition partners, 71 Composting, 6, 90, 92, 94, 95, 106 Constituents, 32, 44, 69 Constitutional responsibility, 66, 67,  106, 146 Contested, 7, 47 Coordination, 31, 32, 54, 92, 105,  114, 146, 147, 152 Cost recovery, 80, 131 Crisis, 1–4, 6, 8, 21–23, 30, 68, 74,  75, 77, 78, 105, 141–143,  156, 158–160 Crosscutting, 31 168 INDEX D Data, 1, 5, 18, 22, 28, 46, 77,  78, 81, 89, 93, 98, 101,  129, 132 Decoupling, 17, 67, 124 Denmark, 18, 49, 152 Dimensions, 33, 64, 65, 75, 77, 78,  145, 146, 155 Drivers, 42, 52–54, 56, 74, 92, 95,  112, 118 Dutch, 52, 71 E Eco-industry, 44 Ecological, 2, 17, 20, 106, 157 Economic instruments, 80, 95, 105 Ecosystems, 2, 21, 22, 159 Elections, 68, 73, 75 End of pipe, 61, 105, 144 EU Directive 2018/851, 45,  144, 154 European, 2, 5, 6, 18, 20, 25,  62, 94, 98, 105, 113,  118, 127, 147 European Commission , 6, 17,  44, 45, 48, 51, 62, 76, 77, 112,  113, 143 European Economic Area Agreement  , 46, 47, 67, 90, 93, 95,  102, 112–114, 120, 121, 127,  129, 133, 144 European Free Trade Association  , 113, 127 European Green Capital Award , 130 European Green Deal , 113 European Parliament, 9, 17, 45,  67, 74, 144 European Union , 17, 30,  67, 78, 89 EU 2015 Circular Economy  Package, 112Evidence, 2, 6–8, 16, 20, 29, 30, 32,  34, 48, 56, 68, 71, 78–81, 122,  123, 134, 141, 142, 153, 156 Extended producer responsibility  , 25, 47, 67, 115, 131, 144 F Facilitator, 7, 118 Flanders, vii, viii, 8, 89–98, 100–102,  104, 106, 146, 147, 150, 154,  156, 157, 159 Flemish Public Waste Agency  , 5, 91–98, 100–102,  104, 106, 147, 150, 154, 157 Fost Plus, 97, 101, 150, 151, 154 Framework, 8, 9, 32–34, 54, 56, 57,  111, 114, 131, 133, 134, 145,  146, 148, 149, 155, 158,  159, 6479 Framing, 66, 74, 75, 77, 79, 118,  155, 159 G Garbage can model, 69 Germany, 71, 73, 97, 121, 129, 131 Governance, 5, 22, 26–29, 32, 49, 53,  63, 68, 69, 80, 89, 112, 117,  142, 147, 148 Grassroots activism, 72 H Hazardous waste, 9, 111, 122, 123,  126–128, 131, 134, 152, 157 I Indicators, 20, 46, 63, 68, 75–77, 80,  81, 101, 112, 155, 156 Indonesia, 16, 17 169  INDEX   Industrial ecology, 34, 41, 43, 44 Industry agreement on the reduction of  food waste , 119 Institutional context, 7, 9, 30,  66, 68, 151 Institutionalism, 66 Interest groups, 31, 68, 70, 74, 124,  149, 151 Interregional Packaging Commission  , 91, 97, 98, 100, 106,  147, 150 L Landfill, vii, 3, 17, 19–21, 23–26, 28,  30, 43, 46, 47, 50, 56, 67, 73,  74, 79, 80, 90, 94, 95, 98, 104,  115, 122, 123, 129, 144, 147,  150, 152, 154, 156 Leadership, 26–29, 70, 72, 149 Legislation, 25, 45, 89, 91, 92, 106,  113–115, 133, 147, 148 M Malaysia, 3, 16–18 Management-based, 44, 143 Market based measures, 73 Micro plastic, 2 Ministry of the Climate and the  Environment, 114, 148 Multidimensional, 26, 29, 31 Multilevel system, 7–9, 22, 27, 29, 31,  66, 67, 102, 104, 133,  144–147, 158 Multiple Streams Framework  , 68 Municipal governments, vii, 9, 26, 31,  78, 92, 114, 122, 123, 130, 145,  147, 151, 152 Municipal solid waste , 1,  93–96, 115, 129, 150Municipal waste, 5, 8, 9, 18, 19, 21,  22, 27, 45, 46, 80, 90, 93, 102,  103, 112, 115, 127, 129, 133,  134, 144, 152, 157 N Nationally Determined Contributions  , 34 National Sword Policy, 2, 16, 101 Neoliberal, 32 The Netherlands, 52, 97 Networked model, 27 New Public Management , 26 NGO, 44, 79, 81, 117, 143, 151 Nordic Council of Ministers ,  9, 115, 119, 134, 157 Norway, 9, 46, 82, 111–135, 146,  148, 151–159 Norwegian Association of Local and  Regional Authorities, 114 Norwegian Environment Agency, 112,  123, 124, 153 Norwegian Federation of  Industries, 118 O Organisation for Economic  Co-operation and Development  , 5, 16–19, 21, 24,  29–31, 34, 44, 45, 48–50, 52–55,  62, 64, 67–69, 77, 80, 81, 134,  142, 143, 156, 157 Oslo Energy Recycling Agency, 131 Oslo Kommune, 130, 133, 148, 152 P Paris Climate Agreement, 34 Parliamentary democracies, 71 Path dependent, 26 170 INDEX Pay As You Throw , 94,  95, 98, 104 Plastic waste, 2–4, 16, 17, 23–26,  63, 101, 121, 131, 134,  157, 159 Policy actors, 9, 56, 68, 70, 71,  76, 96–97, 119, 121–124,  143, 145, 149–153,  157, 159–161 Policy agenda, 57, 68, 74, 77, 145,  153, 156, 158, 159 Policy entrepreneur, 68, 70, 71,  149, 150 Policy ideas, 71, 149, 153–155 Policy narratives, 70 Policy priority, 8, 9, 54, 56, 62, 64,  75, 78, 80, 82, 105, 111, 121,  131, 132, 135, 145,  147, 156–159 Policy window, 68, 94, 147 Pollution Control Act 1981 ,  115, 116 Problem definition, 75 Profit, 7 R Recycled, 3, 6, 17, 23–25, 42–44, 46,  78, 95, 98, 101, 105, 111, 127,  129, 131, 133, 144, 152,  154, 156 Recycling, viii, 2, 16, 41, 62, 89,  111, 142 Regulations, 3, 5, 7, 25, 26, 29–32,  45, 46, 52, 56, 63, 80, 95, 101,  104, 112, 114, 117, 120, 122,  134, 144, 148, 152, 153,  155, 160 Regulatory, 5–8, 22, 27, 29, 30,  32, 33, 52, 54, 56, 63, 64,  72, 80, 82, 105, 116, 122,  124, 131, 133, 134,  142, 155 Roadmaps, 117–119S Sanctions, 89, 96, 98 Satisficing, 69 Standing Committee for Energy and  the Environment, 113, 151 State of the Environment  Indicators, 76 Statistics Norway, 111, 125 Status quo, 66, 70, 141–161 Stewardship, 25, 27, 30, 42, 48, 91,  102, 156 Stortinget, 113, 122–124, 132, 151 Subnational, 31, 66, 67, 145 Sustainable, viii, 1–5, 7, 9, 17, 20, 26,  27, 29, 32–35, 42, 43, 45,  47–49, 52, 53, 56, 61, 71–73,  77, 82, 92, 111, 112, 116, 119,  120, 141–143, 145, 146,  150–153, 159 Sustainable Consumption and  Production Action Plan, 17 Sustainable Development Goals  , 3, 17, 32, 34, 76, 96,  120, 142, 146, 159 T Thailand, 16, 17 3Rs approach, 4 Towards a circular economy: A zero  waste programme for Europe , 45,  143, 154 Toxic colonialism, 16 Transition, 5, 7, 8, 26, 33, 34, 42, 49,  50, 54, 56, 57, 62, 76, 77, 82,  94, 102, 104, 106, 116, 141,  143, 145, 148, 154, 156, 157,  159, 160 Trust, 6, 15, 122, 142, 159 U UK National Audit Office, 24 UN Environment Programme, 1, 21 171  INDEX   Unilever, 72, 97, 150 United Nations Development  Programme , 3, 17 Urbanisation, 18, 26, 44 V Val-I-Pac, 97, 98, 100, 150 Valorisation, 5 Vancouver, 49, 50 Vested interest, 3, 73, 79, 156, 161 Vietnam, 16, 17 VLAREA, 90 Voluntary, 4, 5, 7, 8, 25, 26, 29–33,  45, 48, 62, 72, 97, 118–120,  150, 155 W Wallonia, 90, 91, 93, 147 Waste crisis, 1–4, 142, 159, 160Waste hierarchy, 4, 7, 20, 34, 44, 45,  67, 104, 143 Waste management, vii, 1–9,  15–35, 44–52, 54, 62, 64,  66, 67, 73, 76, 77, 79, 80,  82, 89–106, 111–135,  141–154, 156–159 Waste-to-energy , 48, 51, 78,  115, 124, 133, 161 White Paper, 112, 116, 122, 123,  134, 148, 149 Wicked policy problems, 27 Y Yeo Bee Yin, 16, 17 Z Zero waste, 21, 34, 43, 44,  48, 50, 143 

