Vol.:1 3Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10098-019-01686-0 PERSPECTIVE Waste‑to‑energy is compatible and complementary with recycling  in the circular economy Jo Van Caneghem1  · Karel Van Acker2  · Johan De Greef3 · Guido Wauters4 · Carlo Vandecasteele5 Received: 30 December 2018 / Accepted: 11 March 2019  © Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019 Abstract This paper reviews the role of conventional waste-to-energy, i.e. incineration of  municipal solid waste with energy recovery, in the circular economy. It shows that, although waste-to-energy figures on a lower level in the European waste hierarchy than recycling, it plays, from an overall sustainability point of view, an essential, complementary and facilitating role within the circular economy. First of all, waste-to-energy combusts  only waste that is non-recyclable for economic, technical or environmental reasons. This way waste-to-energy is compatible with recycling and only competes with landfill, which is lower in the waste hierarchy. Furthermore, waste-to-energy keeps material cycles, and ultimately the environment and humans largely free from toxic substances. Finally, waste-to-energy allows recovery of both energy and materials from non-recyclable waste and hence contributes to keeping materials in circulation. These arguments are elabo-rated and illustrated with many examples. This paper also points out the pitfalls of a circular economy if it merely focuses on material cycles, disregarding economic, environmental, social and health aspects of sustainability. Graphical abstract Keywords Waste-to-energy · Circular economy · Waste · Recycling  * Jo Van Caneghem   jo.vancaneghem@kuleuven.be 1 TC Materials Technology, Group T Leuven Campus, KU  Leuven, Andreas Vesaliusstraat 13, Box 2600, 3000 Leuven, Belgium 2 Department of Materials Engineering, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 44, 3001 Leuven, Belgium3 DEG Bvba, Wolvertemsesteenweg 360 b2, 1850 Grimbergen,  Belgium 4 Indaver NV, Ketenislaan 1 Blok D, Haven 1548, 9130 Kallo,  Belgium 5 Department of Chemical Engineering, KU Leuven,  Celestijnenlaan 200F, Box 2424, 3001 Leuven, Belgium  J. Van Caneghem et al. 1 3 Introduction The term “circular economy”  expresses a new concept  that focuses on maintaining the value of products, materi-als and resources in the economy for as long as possible, and on minimizing waste generation . The European Commission  states that  the CE will boost the EU’s competitiveness by protecting markets against scarcity of resources and volatile prices. Furthermore, the transition towards a CE is believed to create new business opportunities and jobs and will imply innovative, more efficient ways of producing and consum - ing. It is also presumed that a CE will save energy and will avoid irreversible damages to the environment and to soci-ety caused by the consumption of resources at a rate that exceeds the earth’s capacity to renew them . The CE is a valuable concept with commendable objec- tives, which are, however, not always obvious to realize in the present economic and societal context. Of the proposed actions for the transition to a CE, most concrete are the legislative proposals related to waste, amending  Direc-tive 2008/98/EC on waste, which is the cornerstone of the European waste policy and legislation,  the packaging and packaging waste directive ,  the landfill directive , the directives  on end-of-life vehicles ,  on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators , and  on waste electrical and electronic equipment . Figure  1 graphically represents the EU waste hierarchy,  which is the basis of the EU waste policy and legislation and a key to the transition to a CE. The waste hierarchy lists waste prevention higher than, in decreasing order of priority, reuse, recycling, recovery and disposal, as a way to optimize resource efficiency and minimize environmental effects of waste management. Conventional waste-to-energy , i.e. incineration of  municipal solid waste with energy recovery, figures on the fourth level of the waste hierarchy , so, on a higher level than disposal (i.e.  landfill or waste combustion with insufficient energy recov - ery), but on a lower level than waste prevention, preparing for reuse, and recycling. Whereas it is widely recognized that disposal as a waste treatment option should be avoided, the first three options seem to fit perfectly in the concept of the circular economy. For WtE, the option in between, it is unclear whether it maintains value in the economy for as long as possible or not. Indeed, many stakeholders in the political and societal debate consider WtE as a competi-tor for reuse and recycling and do not acknowledge its role in a CE, whereas others, on the contrary, consider WtE as indispensable to achieve the CE targets . The hierarchy can be applied with some flexibility,  which means that, e.g. for economic, technical or environ-mental reasons, recovery can be preferred over recycling. This can for instance be the case for wastes containing toxic substances . Merrild et al.  showed that, although recycling of materials from municipal solid waste  is commonly consid-ered to be superior to other waste treatment alternatives, for material fractions with a significant energy content this might not be the case if the treatment alternative is WtE with a high energy recovery rate. The authors showed by means of LCA and assuming high-performance technolo-gies for material recycling as well as for waste incineration that for paper, glass, steel and aluminium, recycling has environmental benefits over WtE. For cardboard and plas-tic, the results were less clear and depended on the level of energy recovery at the WtE plant and on the considered system boundaries and impact categories. After compar - ing 222 LCA studies, also Laurent et al.  concluded that the environmental impact of MSW treatment systems largely depends on the scope and local conditions such as waste composition, energy recovery rate and avoided emissions and that no general priority in waste manage-ment technology can be put forward. More recently, Riga-monti et al.  clearly pointed out that the quality of the materials obtained from recycling is often lower than that of virgin materials so they can only replace virgin materials to a certain, sometimes limited extent. How - ever, in most LCA studies conducted so far, full material substitution is assumed, unrealistically favoring recycling over waste-to-energy. In accordance, Haupt et al.  showed that the credits from material substitution and the assumed energy efficiency of waste-to-energy plants are key variables in LCA of MSW treatment schemes. They pointed out that in countries with extensive separate MSW collection schemes in place, the environmental benefit of further increasing recycling rates is limited compared to the effect of increasing energy efficiency in WtE plants. Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the EU waste hierarchy as laid  down in Directive 2008/98/EC Waste -to-energy is compatible and complementary with recycling in the circular economy   1 3 From these considerations, the obvious overall question  is: “Does WtE still have a valuable role to play in a CE?”.  The European Commission’s answer to this question is rather prudent, recognizing that WtE can play a role in the transition to a CE , but that, in order to ensure the full environmental and economic potential of a CE, WtE should coincide with higher levels of prevention, reuse or recycling. This paper shows, by means of five key arguments, that  WtE, which to date fulfils an essential role in sustainable waste management, will continue doing so in a CE. Fur - ther in this paper, “WtE” refers to incineration of MSW and by extension of hazardous waste with energy recovery, which is the most applied type of WtE. Other types of WtE such as gasification or anaerobic digestion are not included in the scope of the arguments below: 1. WtE combusts  only waste that is  non-recyclable for economic, technical or environmental reasons. 2. WtE can be complementary and compatible with recy - cling. 3. WtE, and by extension high-temperature combustion, e.g. in a dedicated rotary kiln, is essential to keep toxic substances out of materials and out of the environment. 4. WtE allows recycling of a large part of the metals and inorganics in the waste. 5. WtE can generate energy with high efficiency, which can partly feed the CE. The role of WtE in a CE WtE combusts  only waste  that is non‑recyclable for economic, technical  or environmental reasons The limitations of materials recycling were recently made  clear by China’s ban on the import of low-quality recycla-bles in the frame of a broader environmental and health protection policy and in order to stimulate domestic recy - cling. For the last two decades, many European and other industrialized countries have been shipping their low-quality recyclables, i.e. waste not suitable for local recy - clers, such as mixed and soiled plastics, to China or other developing countries where they are further processed or used as cheap fuel, often in rudimentary circumstances . Although this practice ensured high “recycling rates” for the exporting countries, it ignored the recyclable’s quality problem and the environmental and human health effects of the recycling at its destina-tion. China’s ban has made clear that the right target for the recycling industry is not to achieve higher recycling rates, but to produce more high-quality recyclables . It also shows that the current technical and eco-nomic limitations of recycling should be recognized. Indeed, high-quality recycling at reasonable cost is not always feasible, e.g. due to insufficient sorting or separa-tion of waste streams at the source . Some materials also suffer from degradation upon recycling, ultimately limiting the number of times they can be recycled. A typical example is the shortening of fibres in paper or textile . Finally, techniques to produce a recycled  product or material meeting the quality and/or functional standards or requirements of the consumer at a competi-tive cost may simply not yet exist . The technical and economic limitations of recycling  may further be illustrated by the case of household pack - aging waste, for which well-established separate collec-tion systems are in place in many regions, and efficient sorting processes ensure relatively pure material streams with high recycling potential. Separate collection at the source is indeed essential to obtain clean waste streams for which recycling is technically and economically feasible . In Flanders, the Northern region of Belgium, for instance, source separation and collection of household packaging waste, is well established. Household packaging waste is collected separately as PMD waste, i.e. a mix of plastic bottles and flasks, metal packaging such as tins and cans, and drink cartons. In highly automated sorting centres, the separately collected PMD waste is further separated into four fractions: a plastic fraction , a metal fraction , drink cartons  and a sorting residue , which is sent to WtE for final treatment . In 2016, 66 707 t of plastic bottles and flasks was recycled through this scheme, i.e. 75.3 mass% of the 88 572 t of plastic bottles and flasks brought on the market. However, this high recycling rate has to be put in the right perspective. Indeed, it can only be obtained because the collected PMD waste is restricted to a limited number of rather easily separable and recycla-ble material types. For this reason, plastic foil, bags and yoghurt pots, which are composed of polymer types other than polyethylene terephthalate  and high-density polyethylene , are for the time being excluded from the PMD waste, because their separation into individually recyclable fractions is economically not yet viable. This incompatible plastic packaging is therefore collected as residual waste and is treated in WtE plants. This case of Flanders shows that high recycling rates of  specific MSW fractions can be established by strict, source-separated collection. However, separation of waste com-posed of different, difficult to separate materials, e.g. food packaging or hygienic waste    J. Van Caneghem et al. 1 3 into recyclable fractions with an acceptable market value,  seems technically and economically impossible . Such non-recyclable waste is typically col- lected as residual waste, which is, in line with the waste hierarchy, preferably incinerated in WtE plants. This coin - cides with less waste going to landfill. According to Grosso , there is no generally applicable answer to the ques- tion “To which extent should material recycling be encour - aged versus energy recovery?”, because the answer is subject to specific local conditions. At the current state of knowl-edge, good quality waste materials , including high grade plastic items, such as PET and HDPE bottles, glass, metals, clean paper and cardboard, are better recycled. For such materials, one should aim at “real” recycling, yielding secondary materials of the same quality level than virgin materials . Lower-quality waste materials, such as mixed plastic polymers, are, however, commonly “downcycled” to lower-quality materi-als . In this case, WtE treatment producing thermal and electric energy becomes as a com-petitive option . WtE can be complementary and compatible  with recycling Figure  2 shows how MSW was treated in different Euro- pean countries in 2015. A distinction is made between  “recycling, composting and digestion”, “waste-to-energy”, i.e. incineration with sufficient energy recovery according to the R1 equation given in annex II of Directive 2008/98/EC (R1 value ≥ 60% if in operation before 01/01/2009 or R1  value ≥ 65% if permitted after 31/12/2008) and “disposal”  consisting on the one hand of incineration without or with insufficient energy recovery and on the other hand of landfill. A first observation is that even within Europe, large regional differences exist between “Western and Northern” European countries and “Eastern and Southern” European countries. The former have in general a lower disposal rate  than the EU 27 average, which goes along with higher “recycling, composting and digestion” and “waste-to-energy” rates. In fact, in 2015 Germany and Flanders already reached the EU’s circular economy target for “reuse and recycling” of MSW, i.e. 65%, which is only to be reached by 2030 . In several of these Western European countries such as Switzerland, Germany, Sweden, Belgium , Denmark, the Netherlands, Austria, and Norway, a MSW landfill ban is effectively in place; they landfill less than 3% of their MSW. In contrast, the Eastern and Southern European countries have gener - ally higher disposal rates than the EU 27 average, which goes along with lower “recycling, composting and digestion” rates and with lower or even zero “waste-to-energy” rates. These findings based on Fig.  2 are in line with a recent  study showing that the dedicated WtE capacity for MSW is unevenly distributed over EU member states . Only six countries  account for more than 75% of the total EU’s WtE capacity. The highest per capita WtE capacity is found in Sweden and Denmark, followed by the Netherlands, Austria, Finland and Belgium. In contrast, in most of the Southern and Eastern European countries not much dedicated WtE capacity yet exists; hence, these coun-tries still predominantly rely on landfill . The major drivers for high recycling and incineration  rates in “Northern and Western” Europe compared to “Southern and Eastern” Europe are: 1. Socio-economic. France and the countries to the left of  France in Fig.  2, except Estonia and Slovenia, are all  “wealthy” countries figuring in the top 15 of the GDP/capita list of European Countries . They have the financial means to sup-port the Capex and Opex of WtE and of installations Fig. 2  MSW management in the  different EU member states in  2015 . Data for Flanders were obtained from Vervaet et al.  0%20%40%60%80%100% Switzerlan d German y Flanders Sweden Belgiu m Denmar k Netherland s Austri a Norway Estoni a Finland Luxembour g United Kingdo m Sloveni a France EU 2 7 Italy Poland Czech Republic Hungar y Lithuani a Spain Bulgaria Latvia Slovaki a Cyprus Croa/g415 a Romani a Malta Montenegro Serbia Recycling, compos/g415ng+diges/g415o n Waste-to-Energ y Disposal EU target reuse and recycling  Waste -to-energy is compatible and complementary with recycling in the circular economy   1 3 for recycling, composting and digesting, and have the  technology, and the skilled workforce. The good position  of Estonia and Slovenia, and the relatively bad position  of, e.g. Malta, Cyprus and Spain , shows that this is not the only rea-son. 2. Environmental awareness. In, e.g. Sweden and Germany, the environmental awareness movement has already for several decades been very active, which is not the case in, e.g. Romania or Poland. High environmental activity motivates governments towards sustainable waste man - agement. 3. Availability and cost of land suitable or landfill, which is influenced by population density, wealth and production and consumption patterns of the population. 4. Membership of the EU and for how long is also a driver, as member countries should comply with the European waste legislation. Figure  2 also clearly shows that countries with high  WtE rates also have high recycling rates. WtE and recy - cling are thus complementary and compatible, and advanced waste management systems  rely on both. This does,  however, not preclude variation of the relative importance from country to country, depending on the local waste policy and priorities and the occurrence of incinerators and installations for separate collection, sorting and recy - cling of waste . As it turns out, countries with the highest rates of WtE, e.g. Denmark, Norway and Sweden, all incinerating at least 50% of their waste , also tend to have high rates of recy - cling and composting of organic materials and food waste. But one can argue that, if WtE would not be applied at such large scale, these countries with an environmentally conscious image would have even higher recycling rates. Germany, for example, incinerates less than 35% of its MSW and recycles more than 65%, a considerably better recycling rate than the 40-plus % of Scandinavian coun-tries . It can also be argued that, in principle, if WtE complies  with the requirement of only combusting waste that is non-recyclable for economic, technical or environmental reasons  only waste that  is non-recyclable for economic, technical or environmental reasons”), no competition exists between WtE and recycling. However, as discussed in the EC’s communication on the role of WtE in the circular economy , it is essential to avoid future WtE overcapacities,  as this is critical to avoid potential economic losses due to “stranded assets”, and might hamper an increase in recycling rates. Again one can distinguish between Member States with low or non-existent WtE capacity and high reliance on landfill  and Member States with high WtE capacity . The former should prioritize the development of separate collection systems and effective recycling infrastructure, and thus divert waste from landfill . This is, from a climate perspective, particularly urgent for biodegrad - able waste, as diverting biodegradable waste from landfill reduces methane emissions . It was shown that diverting 1 ton of biodegradable waste from a landfill towards anaerobic digestion to produce biogas and fertilizer can prevent up to 2 ton of  CO 2 equivalent emissions (Bernstad and Jansen  2012). Indeed, for the separately collected organic frac-tion of MSW such as kitchen and garden waste, anaerobic digestion with recycling of the digestate as fertilizer could represent an attractive management option . Furthermore, the expansion of WtE capacity  for treatment of non-recyclable waste should always be con-sidered from a long-term perspective, taking into account aspects of waste availability , capacity for co-combustion in industrial processes such as cement production and planned capacity expansion in neighbour - ing countries or regions . If expansion of WtE capacity is justified, obviously the new-to-build plants have to use state-of-the-art technology with the highest possible energy and material efficiency and have to comply with the legislation in place, e.g. concerning air emissions . When both WtE and recycling techniques are in place, in  the present technological and economic context, a large part of recycling can only stand thanks to legal obligations, taxes, as well as sometimes significant subsidies . This can be countered by increasing incineration taxes or decreasing financial support for WtE, whether or not combined with increasing landfill taxes. Furthermore, older, less efficient WtE plants can be phased out . The data in Fig.  2 do not take into account the amount  of household waste that is littered, i.e. waste that uninten-tionally ends up in the environment or is sometimes even intentionally dumped. Examples are waste transported by wind or animals from landfills into the environment, which is avoided in WtE plants where waste is contained in closed bunkers, or waste abandoned, e.g. in road shoulders, woods or rivers. In Flanders for instance, in 2013 about 15,000 t of litter was collected by the local communities, correspond-ing to 2.3 kg per person per year, i.e. about 1.6% of the amount of collected residual waste  . However,   J. Van Caneghem et al. 1 3 the amount of litter that is not collected and accumulated in  the different environmental compartments is probably much higher. The discussion above only considers Europe. On a global  level, 40% of MSW is disposed of in landfills, 19% is recy - cled or composted, and 11% is recovered in WtE plants. The remaining 33% of MSW is littered or openly dumped . Waste management varies considerably by income and region. Open dumping predominantly pre-vails in low-income countries, where about 93% of the waste is openly burned or dumped on roads and open land or in waterways. As the income of a country increases, a first step towards more sustainable waste management is construction and use of landfills, whereas only middle- and high-income countries apply recycling, composting and WtE . This evolution in waste management can be illustrated by the case of China: in 1980 the MSW collection rate in this country was only about 30% and waste management consisted mainly of open dumping. In 2003, the MSW collection rate had increased to 70% and about 85% of the collected waste was landfilled, 10% composted, and 5% incinerated. By 2013, the MSW collection rate had increased to 90%, with 68% of the collected MSW landfilled, 2% composted or recycled, and 30% incinerated. The number of WtE plants increased from 47 in 2003 to 166 in 2013 with a corresponding increase in incineration capacity from 3.7 × 10 6 to 46.34 × 106 t per year  . A next step in China’s waste manage-ment policy is the introduction of separate collection and recycling . Nevertheless, the statement that high-income countries apply recycling, composting and WtE may not hold true for all developed countries. In the USA for instance, 34.7% of the generated MSW is recycled or composted, 12.8% is treated in WtE plants, and the remaining 52.5% is still landfilled . So, although the USA is higher in the GDP per capita list than all but a few western European countries (Interna - tional Monetary Fund 2018), landfill remains the most applied MSW treatment option. Yet, also in the USA, there is a trend towards more recycling and WtE, although less pronounced than in the western European countries: the percentage of MSW that is recycled increased from 9.6% in 1980 to 25.8% in 2015, and the share of WtE increased from less than 2% to 12.8% over the same period of time. WtE, and by extension high‑temperature  combustion, e.g. in a dedicated rotary kiln,  is essential to keep toxic substances out of materials  and out of the environment Toxic substances in recycled materials Special attention has to be paid to the dissipation of toxic  substances in recycled materials, instead of focusing only on maintaining materials in circulation as long as possible. This can be illustrated by the example of bisphenol A  in recycled paper. BPA is added as a colour developer in ther - mal paper, commonly used for example sales receipts. Due to its oestrogenic properties, BPA is considered an endocrine disruptor and is classified as a category 3 reproductive toxic substance, meaning it is alarming for human fertility . Dermal contact to paper is recognized as one  of the human exposure routes to BPA . In Europe, paper is recycled on average 3.5 times, and about 50% of the raw material for the pulp and paper industry is used paper . As thermal paper is typically  collected together with other waste paper, it is introduced in the paper recycling loop and this way BPA is dissipated over a variety of paper products. This was confirmed by Pivnenko et al. , who showed that in Danish paper and board samples, the BPA concentration ranged from 0.3 to 480 µg/g. They pointed out that recycling of waste paper was the main source of BPA contamination in paper products, which is sustained by the chemical and physical properties of BPA. An interesting general conclusion of this study was that mass-based recycling targets do not ensure high-quality recycled materials, as was already discussed in Section “ WtE combusts  only waste that  is non-recyclable for economic, technical or environmental reasons”. A recent report issued by the European Commission  acknowledges that the collection and recycling targets in the European waste legislation merely focus on increasing the amounts of recycled materials, not on their quality regarding the absence of toxic substances .  The report also states that no quality standards exist for toxic substances in recycled materials , except for the end-of-waste criteria, which exist only for a few material types. Hence, the European legislation in place does not encourage activities to decontaminate waste or recycled materials. Another type of pollutants possibly present in materi- als are the persistent organic pollutants . Because of their particular combination of physical and chemical prop-erties, they remain intact for many years or even decades once released into the environment. As a consequence, they become widely distributed over the different environmen-tal compartments, where they constitute a chronic source of exposure for plants and animals and also for humans, directly or indirectly. The toxic effects of POPs, typically accumulat-ing in fatty tissue, include cancer, allergies, damage to the nervous system, endocrine disruption and developmental effects . The Stockholm convention, which entered into force in 2004, currently lists 26 POPs whose production and use is eliminated or reduced or for which measures have to be taken to reduce unintentional release. Listed POPs include insecticides such as DDT, industrial  Waste -to-energy is compatible and complementary with recycling in the circular economy   1 3 chemicals such as polychlorinated biphenyls  and  polybrominated diphenyl ethers  and unintention-ally released POPs such as polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and furans . Because of their historical release and persistence, POPs have become ubiquitous in the environ-ment. This was demonstrated amongst others by Jamieson et al. , who analysed POP levels in amphipods caught in the Kermadec and Mariana Trench in the North Pacific at 7–10 km below sea level, which is believed to be one of the most remote and inaccessible habitats on earth. Surprisingly, the POP contaminant levels in the deep sea amphipods were considerably higher than documented for sediments or other marine fauna in nearby heavy industrialized regions. A danger of recycling without eliminating POPs or mate- rials contaminated with POPs is that they are not removed from the material cycle as illustrated by Pivnenko et al.  for brominated flame retardants in plastics. POPs  can have much farther reaching effects when they enter the food chain. As one of many food contamination incidents, the Belgian PCB/dioxin incident of 1999 clearly illustrates the dangers and potential far reaching consequences of recycling products contaminated with POPs. 50–100 l of discarded transformer oil “Askarel”, containing 40–50 kg of PCB oil and 1 g of dioxins were accidently added to the household waste fat collection point in a waste recycling centre. The contaminated fat was processed together with other  fats and used for the production of 500 ton of animal feed that was delivered to more than 1500 animal and dairy farms. The true cause and scope of the contamination became only clear 4 months after the original contamination in the recycling centre and after fat of affected animals had already been re-recycled into the animal food chain . Eventually, all contaminated food was removed from the market and thermally destructed, par - tially in WtE plants. Van Larebeke et al.  estimated the total number of cancers resulting from human exposure during this incident to range between 40 and 8000. Another aspect to consider is that for some waste types,  recycling is more harmful than the production from virgin material. An example is the recycling of WEEE plastics containing toxic polybrominated diphenyl ethers  as a flame retardant. Evidence from studies suggests that the main effect of long-term exposure to low doses of lower brominated diphenyl ethers is damage to the reproductive system . The main route of exposure for the general population is ingestion of house dust and inhala-tion of indoor air containing PBDEs emitted from consumer products, particularly electronic equipment . Because of their persistence, bioaccumulation and toxicity, tetra, penta, hexa, hepta and decabromodiphenyl ether were added as POP to Annex A of the Stockholm convention, meaning that their production and use is to be eliminated. In view of this, article 8  and annex VII of Directive 2012/19/EU on waste of electrical and electronic equipment  state that “proper treatment” and recycling or recovery of WEEE has to include, as a minimum, the removal of plastic parts containing brominated flame retardants  such as PBDEs. A first problem in recycling these removed WEEE plastics is that they may contain prohibited PBDEs that are not destroyed in the recycling process and hence are dissi-pated over the recycled products . This  way, the PBDEs remain in the material cycle and the recy - cled products remain a source of human exposure to these prohibited, toxic substances. Another problem in the recy - cling of PBDE-containing plastics is that upon recycling, highly toxic polybrominated dibenzodioxins and furans  can be formed that are, either immediately or during later use, emitted from the recycled plastics mak - ing them a potential source of human exposure . Schlummer et al.   stated that besides sophisticated waste stream management and input control measures, extractive processes removing bromine from the waste plastics before extrusion can elimi - nate PBDEs from the plastic material cycle and prevent for - mation of PBDD/Fs. They acknowledge, however, that these extraction technologies are not available on an industrial scale, probably because the high energy and infrastructural demands of these processes increase the recycling cost, so that the recycled plastics become too expensive compared to plastics made from virgin materials. As a consequence, in the present economic context, WtE remains the only end-of-life technology in place for PBDE-containing plastics that ensures destruction of these toxic flame retardants with recovery of the calorific value and with only very limited, well-controlled emission of PBDD/Fs .  This case of WEEE plastics shows that, for wastes contain-ing toxic substances, recycling is not always the preferential treatment option from a human health perspective. The examples above show that it is necessary to first  isolate toxic substances from the material cycle to prevent them from being dissipated over recycled materials and the environment, ultimately leading to human exposure. The isolated materials then have to be treated in such a way that the toxic substances are either destroyed or definitively removed from the environment. For waste contaminated with low levels of POPs, combustion in WtE plants under conditions as laid down in the Industrial Emission Direc-tive , i.e. respecting a residence time of the combus-tion gases of at least 2 s at more than 850 °C, is the only treatment option in this regard. For waste containing high POP concentrations, specific high-temperature combustion techniques, such as a rotary kiln with a secondary combus-tion chamber, are applied in practice to guarantee complete destruction . Indeed, whereas in WtE plants incinerating MSW the legal provision of 2 s and 850 °C is only obtained in the gas phase, in hazardous waste   J. Van Caneghem et al. 1 3 incinerators these conditions are also maintained in the solid  phase in the primary combustion chamber, thus guarantee-ing “destruction” and “destruction and removal” efficiencies  required by UNEP . Research in real-scale WtE plants showed that POPs,  such as PCDD/Fs, PCBs and PBEs, are largely destroyed upon combustion, whereas the amount of PCDD/Fs and PCBs newly formed upon cooling of the flue gases in the steam boiler is limited and to a great extent independent of the POP concentration in the input waste .  For hazardous waste incinerators, DEs above 99.999% and DREs above 99.9999% have been reported for POP wastes . For WtE plants incinerating non-hazardous  waste such as MSW or similar commercial waste, almost no DEs or DREs have been reported in literature. Based on the POP input and output data range reported by Van Caneghem et al. , in the considered fluidised bed combustor, for PCBs DEs between 99.918 and 99.997%, taking into account variations in composition of inputs and outputs, were obtained in case the usual waste feed consisting of 70% RDF and 30% sludge was combusted and between 99.980 and 99.986% in case the waste feed consisted of 25% ASR, 25% RDF and 50% sludge. The given DEs and DRE’s show that modern WtE plants are overall POP sinks, since they eliminate more POPs than they produce. It should be noted that DE and DRE depend on the operating conditions  and the type of waste  and are hence different and specific for each installation and waste input . Heavy metals In contrast to toxic organic substances, toxic heavy metals  present in waste are not destroyed in a WtE process, but are concentrated in the solid residues. Their partitioning over bottom ash, boiler ash and air pollution control  resi-due depends on the speciation of the metal in the waste, the presence of other elements with which the metals can bind to give a volatile compound, and on temperature, residence time and mixing conditions in the furnace . Halogens are instrumental in volatilizing metal  elements, since metal halides  typi-cally have melting and boiling points below the temperatures  DE= POP content in input waste  DRE = POP content in input wastein the furnace. In general, the higher the temperature in the furnace, the higher is the fraction of heavy metals that trans-fers to the gas phase and the lower the fraction in the bottom ash. With respect to their transfer to the combustion gas,  two groups of heavy metals can be distinguished:  Cr,  Co, Mn and Ni that are mainly transferred to the gas phase by entrainment. Their transfer coefficients are determined by their speciation and distribution in the waste, and more than 90% of the amount present in the waste remains in the bottom ash;  Cu, Mo, Pb, Sn, Zn, Sb, As, Cd and Hg for which evaporation is the main transfer process. Their transfer coefficients are not only determined by their specia-tion and distribution in the waste, but also by chemical and physical conditions and kinetics in the combustion process. The percentage of these elements that remains in the bottom ash ranges from 97%  to about 1%  . Due to the enrichment of certain heavy metals such as  Hg, Pb, Zn and Sb, direct recovery of boiler ash or APC residue as building material is not possible from an environ-mental and health perspective. Furthermore, boiler ash and APC residue  represent a much smaller mass than bottom ash  . Therefore, WtE boiler ash and APC residue are typically stabilized and solidified with cement, and the resulting monolith is dis-charged on a hazardous waste landfill, which is specially designed with natural and artificial liners and drainage sys-tems to prevent leaching of toxic substances to the envi-ronment . This way, waste incineration with subsequent solidification and stabili-zation, and controlled landfill of the generated APC residues prevents heavy metal dissipation in recycled materials and assures their storage in a safe sink. Emission of air pollutantsCombustion of waste in WtE plants results in the generation  of flue gases that contain, besides the products of incom-plete combustion mentioned in Section “ Toxic substances  in recycled materials”, gaseous pollutants such as  SO 2, HCl,  NOx, CO and particulate matter . Yet, WtE plants have to comply with stringent emission limit values , as shown in Table  1 comparing the ELVs for WtE plants and  Waste -to-energy is compatible and complementary with recycling in the circular economy   1 3 other combustion plants as laid down in the EU Industrial  Emission Directive . Hence, WtE plants are equipped with extensive flue gas cleaning equip-ment, generally consisting of selective catalytic or non-catalytic reduction of NOx, neutralization of acid gases by injection of lime or an alkaline solution, adsorption of, e.g. dioxins and mercury on activated carbon and dust filtration in a bag filter or electrostatic precipitator . As a result of this  extensive flue gas cleaning, the concentrations of the regu-lated pollutants in the gases that are emitted at the stack of WtE plants are generally a factor 10–100 below the emis-sion limit values . The emission of pollutants to air  from WtE plants is limited and in each case lower than for conventional energy production, resulting in considerable avoided environmental impacts as shown by, e.g. by Billen et al.  and Jeswani and Azapagic .WtE allows recycling of a large part of the metals  and inorganics in the waste WtE allows material recovery, with possible subsequent  recycling, from non-recyclable waste. Bottom ash , which is by far the major residue of WtE, is a heterogene-ous material, mainly consisting of ash, stones and met-als, and has a broad particle size distribution, generally from < 1 to 25 mm diameter. The inorganic fraction of  the MSW  typically leaves the grate furnace or fluidized bed almost unchanged. In a rotary kiln for treatment of hazard-ous waste, the inorganic fraction generally rather fuses. From MSW BA, the metals, which are in fact the most valuable fraction, and the mineral fraction, which has the largest mass and volume, can be recycled. For recycling as building material, the mineral fraction of BA should com-ply with local legal concentration and/or leaching limits, which are most often exceeded for Cu, Mo, Sb,  Cl − and   SO42−. Vandecasteele et al.  described the Indaver  wet BA treatment scheme in which, in view of recycling, ferrous metals are removed by overhead magnets, whereas non-ferrous metals are removed by eddy current separa-tion. Moreover, three mineral fractions are obtained, which can be used as building material: two granular fractions  and a sand fraction . After ageing  for about 3 months, the granu-late fractions show low metal leaching and comply with the heavy metal leaching regulations. The major applica-tion of these compliant BA fractions is in uncontained bulk applications, such as artificial hills or as subbase in road construction, embankments or noise barriers . Uncontained application means that no barriers such as liners have to be provided to isolate the ash or the mixture of ash with other building materials from the surrounding soil, and that no intensive monitor - ing or aftercare of the groundwater has to be provided . The fine sludge fraction   contains the highest concentration of toxic substances and can be used, e.g. as cover layer on hazardous waste land-fills . In general, leaching of heavy metals is the main chemical barrier for uncontained application of WtE BA as bulk building material. Over the last decade, WtE BA treatment has significantly  improved  to increase  the recovery rate and improve the purity of the separated materials. Indeed, in addition to the wet treatment process discussed above, a half dry  treatment, ADR, was developed  in which a ballistic separator is used for separating fines adhering to minerals, improving metal recovery. Dry treatment schemes were also developed, Table 1  Overview of European emission limit values for WtE plants  and conventional solid fuel combustion plants (Directive 2010/75/ EC), compared to typical pollutant concentrations in the flue gas emitted at the stack of WtE plants a Plants with a 50–100  MW thermal input, which is comparable to  average size WtE plants, granted a permit after 7 January 2013 b Typical values for state-of-the-art MSW grate furnace incinerators as  reported by Van Caneghem et al.  c  Average value over sample period of minimum 30 min and maxi- mum 8 h d Sb, As, Pb, Cr, Co, Cu, Mn, Ni, V e Expressed in ngTEQ−1Emission limit values Typical pollut-ant concentra-tion range in flue gas emitted at stack Pollutant Combustion plants using coal and other solid  fuels aWtE plants WtE  plantsb Total dust 20 10 0.0–0.8 CO – 50 6.0–14 TOC – 10 0.1–1.8 SO2 400 50 1.6–10.3 NOx 300 200 65–145 HCl – 10 0.9–6.1 HF – 1 – Heavy  metalsc  Cd + Tl – 0.05 0.0001  Hg – 0.05 < 0.0005–0.013  Sum  otherd– 0.5 0.09 PCDD/Fse– 0.1 0.001–0.01  J. Van Caneghem et al. 1 3 e.g. by Martin  and by  ZAV recycling at KEZO in Hinwil  . More- over, the sorting techniques were improved by using better magnets, Eddy current separators and sensor-based pneu-matic sorting . In addi-tion, some special treatments for reducing leaching of Cu and Sb were developed . These developments in principle allow almost  the whole BA fraction to be recycled. Besides its application as uncontained building material,  WtE BA can also be used as replacement for sand, gravel or cement in construction applications, as raw material in cement production and as feedstock for production of ceramic materials . In cement and  concrete applications, besides heavy metals, also chlorides can limit the use of BA. The chloride concentration in BA depends on the composition of the incinerated waste, but is in general relatively high. Chloride can cause corrosion in the cement kiln and can lower the cement quality making it, e.g. more corrosive towards the steel wire-meshing in reinforced concrete. However, to remove chlorides, BA can be pre-treated by washing in dedicated installations, possibly in combination with grinding and sieving . When BA fractions are mixed in concrete as partial  sand, gravel or cement replacement , some problems may occur, such as formation of pop-outs due to reaction between  Al 0,  Zn0 and basic  cement material leading to hydrogen gas. Moreover, swell-ing and cracking may occur due to formation of ettringite  (Ca 6Al2312.26H2O) around  Al0 grains. These  problems can be solved by enhanced removal of metallic Al and Zn from BA . The potential of  recycling WtE BA in cement is sustained by the fact that in the EU28 in 2015, around 170 Mt cement was produced per year  and that about 1.5 t of raw materials  is needed per t of cement . Taking into account that up to 10% of raw material can be replaced by properly treated BA  without any negative impact on the end quality of the cement , around 25 Mt.year −1  of BA can be potentially used in cement production. This amount exceeds about 1.5 times the 16 Mt.year −1 of MSWI  BA actually produced in Europe . Based on data reported in annual or sustainability reports  of European WtE plant operators, typically 10–60 kg of fer - rous metals and 1–30 kg of non-ferrous metals  are recovered per t of MSW incinerated and sold to secondary metal recyclers. This way, WtE enables to re-introduce a part of the metals present in non-recyclable and/or residual waste in the economy. Classification of waste as hazardous or non-hazardous  is based on Commission Decision 2000/532/EC on the List of Waste  amended by Commission Decision 2014/955/EU and Annex III of the Waste Framework Direc-tive 2008/98/EC , amended by regulation 1357/2014 . The latter defines 15 hazard properties to consider in the evaluation of the hazardousness of a waste including, e.g. flammability , carcinogenicity  and corrosiveness . An assessment of the hazard prop-erties of EU BA showed that it is in general non-hazardous by HP1 to HP13 and by HP15. However, for HP14  the results are debatable: based on the total metal content BA should be considered as hazardous waste , whereas based on the more realistic heavy metal leach-ing from BA at its natural pH  this residue can be classified as non-hazardous . Also in recent legislation regulating the use of WtE BA as building material such as the Dutch decree on soil quality, limit val-ues set to prevent damage to the ecosystem only consist of realistic leached concentrations at natural pH . WtE can generate energy with high efficiency  that can partly feed the CE A WtE plant is generally equipped with a steam boiler for  energy recovery from the hot combustion gases. The steam generated in the boiler can be applied in a Rankine power cycle, generating electricity with a turbine, as in a fossil fuel power plant. Part of the electricity is used internally; the remaining is usually supplied to the grid. The net electric efficiency achieved in state-of-the-art WtE plants is gener - ally around 25%, which is modest compared to conventional coal power plants . This is because in WtE boilers, the steam temperature is typically limited to 420 °C, compared to, e.g. 550 °C in power plants, to avoid high-temperature corrosion. Indeed, due to the chemical and physical composition of the MSW, combustion gasses in WtE plants contain high concentrations of acids, metal spe - cies and dust, leading to phenomena of fouling and corrosion . Through application of advanced cladding and coating of metal heat exchanging surfaces, it is possible to apply higher steam parameters. This is, e.g. the case at the AEB WtE plant in Amsterdam, where an advanced steam cycle  is applied, which affords a net electrical efficiency of more than 30% . Construction of such an installation is, however, complicated and expensive, and also the operation costs are higher than in conventional WtE plants. In WtE plants, as in conventional power production pro- cesses, there are three main possibilities for energy genera-tion and application:  electricity is generated through a Rankine cycle and the residual energy  is lost in the cooler after the condenser, which affords a limited overall  Waste -to-energy is compatible and complementary with recycling in the circular economy   1 3 energy efficiency as shown above,  low pressure steam or  hot water from the condenser after the turbine is applied as heat source in a combined heat and power  scheme, which increases the overall energy efficiency of the WtE plant or  the high-temperature steam from the boiler is  directly provided as a process heat source to nearby industry . This approach may afford the highest overall energy effi-ciency of up to 80%. This percentage takes into account, at the input side, besides the energy content of the waste, the energy content of other flows, e.g. combustion air and leakage air flows, and also the typical evaporation losses from the waste and from supplementary liquid flows . Moreover, this effi-ciency also takes into account radiation losses and losses at heat exchangers. In case , the hot water or low pressure steam is used  for heating, e.g. of greenhouses, hospitals, or residences by means of a district heating network. In countries with a high heat demand and district heating infrastructure in place, such as the Scandinavian countries, it has become common prac-tice to use heat from WtE plants for public heating purposes. Cities like Copenhagen, Vienna and Paris have large district heating networks fed by WtE incinerators located in or close to the city . This has the additional advantage of requiring only short MSW transportation distances. In case , WtE plants located in industrial areas directly  supply high-pressure steam to neighbouring companies. A very recent example is the ECLUSE steam network , which connects, via a steam duct and a condensate return duct, a cluster of WtE plants with neighbouring indus-trial companies. The WtE cluster consists of three grate furnace incinerators operated by Indaver, mainly combust - ing household and commercial waste  and of three fluidized bed combustors operated by SLECO, combusting sludge and industrial waste , all located on the same site in the Waasland Port, east of Antwerp . The six incineration lines have an overall waste throughput of around 1,000,000 ton per year and a heat production power of around 250  MW th. The Port of Antwerp is home to the  largest chemical cluster in Europe. The chemical industry is very energy intensive, and its energy consumption is very stable over time. In the chemical industry, heat in the form of steam is typically used for unit operations such as distilla-tion, evaporation or drying, and to drive endothermic chemi-cal reactions. To date, the steam needed by the chemical processes is in general produced on site using natural gas as energy source in a CHP scheme. In 2017, the construc-tion of the new ECLUSE steam network was started, which will deliver high-pressure steam  produced in the WtE cluster to a network of neighbouring industrial  companies. In a first phase starting beginning 2018, which corresponds to 50% capacity, ECLUSE will provide process steam for five chemical companies; in a sub - sequent second phase, the remaining 50% of steam produced will cover the expected increased consumption of the exist-ing consumers, and/or will feed a new chemical cluster. This way, ECLUSE consumers no longer have to produce heat from fossil fuel, avoiding the yearly emission of hundreds of thousands tonnes of  CO 2 . The new steam  network fits in the “Green heat action plan” of the Flemish government aiming at increasing the proportion of green heat in the renewable energy supply in the region. In case no heating network is available, or if it is eco- nomically not viable to build such a network, direct supply to a single neighbouring heat consumer is another option to increase the overall energy efficiency of WtE plants . An interesting example is the Greater Manchester waste project , where annually 850,000 ton of partly pre-treated MSW and solid residues of biomass digestion are treated, with a power of 51  MW th and 82  MWel  in a combined heat and power scheme. The produced high-pressure steam and electricity are delivered to INOVYN’s Runcorn manufacturing site located next to the WtE plants . Alternative WtE technologies such as gasification and  pyrolysis often claim a higher overall energy efficiency than conventional waste combustion, mainly because the produced calorific gas would allow electricity generation with a higher efficiency. However, starting from MSW, the produced syngas contains high concentrations of gaseous pollutants (such as HCl and  H 2S) and tars. Hence, gasifi - cation and pyrolysis plants require either extensive waste  pre-treatment or gas treatment, which decreases the overall energy efficiency. Furthermore, the higher complexity of gasification plants compared to conventional WtE plants, leads to more difficulties in operation, additional mainte-nance and reduced reliability resulting in higher investment and operational costs . These reasons  explain why in practice almost no cases of long-term opera-tion of full-scale MSW gasification plants exist and con-ventional WtE in grate furnaces or fluidized beds remains today the most apt and most applied technology for energy and material recovery from residual, non-recyclable MSW . Plasma pyrolysis of certain special waste types containing heavy metals such as galvanic sludges has the advantage that, due to the very high temperatures obtained in the plasma  , the bottom ash is vitrified, decreasing the metal leaching  allowing the formed “plasma rock” to be recycled as building material instead of landfilled. However, the use of electricity to gen-erate the plasma decreases the overall energy efficiency of the pyrolysis plant  and it remains to be   J. Van Caneghem et al. 1 3 proven that the increased costs are offset by the income from  the plasma rock. Only a limited amount of data on plasma treatment and waste gasification in general is available in the literature, making it difficult to quantitatively compare their energetic and materials performance with that of con-ventional WtE . WtE and its role in the circular economy As discussed in Sections “ WtE combusts (or should com- bust) only waste that is non-recyclable for economic, techni-cal or environmental reasons” and “ WtE, and by extension  high-temperature combustion, e.g. in a dedicated rotary kiln, is essential to keep toxic substances out of materials and out of the environment”, for certain types of waste generated in today’s society, such as mixed wastes, composites, contami-nated materials or wastes containing toxic substances, within the present techno-economical context, recycling might not be the best option from an overall sustainability point of view, i.e. taking into account environmental, economic and societal and health aspects. So, a CE should not only focus on maintaining materials as long as possible in the economy and on decreasing resource depletion, but also has to con-sider economic, environmental, social and health aspects , when the best  waste treatment option is selected. Figure  3 schematically represents the material flows and  the role that WtE and waste recycling could fulfil in a CE. It shows in the circle that human activities in different fields, e.g. agriculture, industry, services and households, generate waste. In a sustainable CE, the most suitable treatment option for the different waste types generated is determined by eco-nomic, environmental, as well as societal and health criteria. For probably the largest part of the waste, recycling is the most sustainable treatment option. This waste is, after processing, largely re-introduced in the economy, preferably in the same application. For another, smaller fraction of the waste, e.g. hygienic, mixed and contaminated waste or waste containing toxic substances, WtE or, in case the waste is classified as hazardous, dedicated combustion in a hazardous waste incin-erator is the preferred treatment option. WtE converts the non-recyclable waste into energy that is delivered back to society, including the recycling industry, and into solid residues that are partly recycled as building material or as secondary metal  and partly stabilized/solidified to be stored in a safe sink. Sorting residues from recycling activities are either sent to WtE for energy recovery or, after appropriate treatment, to a safe sink. This way, WtE (and more in general incinerators, includ- ing dedicated combustors for hazardous waste) fulfils in the CE the role of a gatekeeper enabling material recovery from non-recyclable waste, while keeping recovered materials free from toxic substances. A key factor to reduce the amounts of non-recyclable  waste to be treated in WtE plants is eco-design, which should take into account the sustainability of the end-of-life treat-ment of a product as one of the design parameters . Eco-design can enhance the recyclability  of products, e.g. by selecting and/or limiting material types, by allowing for quick and easy disassembly and by avoid-ing the presence of known toxic substances. With regard Fig. 3  Schematic representation  of the material flows and the  role of WtE and waste recycling in a CE

Waste -to-energy is compatible and complementary with recycling in the circular economy   1 3 to the latter, Goldenman et al.  acknowledge that a  need exists for strategies and implementation instruments  preventing toxic substances from entering consumer goods and material cycles. Conclusions Enhancing high-level material recycling is essential in the transition towards a CE. Although WtE figures on a lower level in the European waste hierarchy than recycling, it plays, from an overall sustainability point of view, an essen-tial, complementary and facilitating role within the CE. Indeed, WtE is the preferred treatment option for waste that in the present context cannot be recycled. Moreover, WtE does not have to compete with recycling, but rather with landfill, which is lower in the waste hierarchy. Furthermore, WtE keeps material cycles, and ultimately the environment and humans free from toxic substances. Finally, WtE not only allows recovering energy from non-recyclable waste, but also allows recycling of some materials from such waste. Unrestrained allowance in the recycling system of waste  containing toxic substances, such as POPs or heavy metals, can increase the environmental and health impact of recy - cled materials. Legislators should be aware that a one-sided focus on increasing recycling volumes can lead to a quality deterioration and to dissipation of toxic substances in recy - cled materials. Instead of only increasing recycling volumes or masses, the quality of the recyclables and the elimina-tion of toxic substances in consumer goods should be the first priority in the transition towards a circular economy. In this regard, WtE fulfils an essential role as a gatekeeper, by destroying and eliminating toxic substances from the mate-rial cycles. Furthermore, WtE offers a treatment method for waste that is, e.g. because of its heterogeneous composition, today not recyclable from an economic point of view, while recovering valuable energy and materials. As long as con-taminated material streams are generated or present in our society, decontamination and hence WtE remain a necessary part of the CE. The ultimate solution towards a fully CE is eco-design that not only takes into account the technical and functional specifications, but also considers the end-of-life aspects of products. Although in an ideal CE scenario, WtE is phased out completely, because all material streams are clean and can be fully recycled in an economically viable way, it is more realistic to expect that WtE will remain nec-essary, at least for many decades, if it can be phased out at all. Indeed, on the one hand, for new materials, although often designed as green alternative to highly contaminat - ing materials, the true environmental and health impact may only be discovered after many years  during which the material cycles and/or the envi-ronment have already been contaminated. On the other hand, material degradation upon recycling cannot be avoided, entailing non-recyclable material residues. Hence, in the future, WtE is likely to remain a necessary, even essential part of the CE, but will probably treat lower amounts of waste, as further progress is made in waste prevention and reuse, which are both higher in the hierarchy than recycling, as well as in eco-design, in avoidance of toxic substances, and in improvement of recycling technology, which allow all three higher-quality recycling. References AEB Amsterdam  For a clean society. Corporate brochure. https  ://www.aebam sterd am.com/media /1552/aeb-corpo rateb rochu re- en-scree n.pdf. Accessed Oct 2018 Arickx S, Van Gerven T, Knaepkens T, Hindrix K, Evens R, Vande- casteele C  Influence of treatment techniques on Cu leach-ing and different organic fractions in MSWI bottom ash leachate. Waste Manag 27:1422–1427 ATSDR - Agency for toxic substances and disease registry)   Public health statement Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers  Belevi H, Moench H  Factors determining the element behavior  in municipal solid waste incinerators. 1. Field studies. Environ Sci Technol 34:2501–2506 Bernstad A, Jansen JL  Review of comparative LCAs of food  waste management systems—current status and potential improve-ments. Waste Manag 32:2439–2455 Billen P, Verbinnen B, De Smet M, Dockx G, Ronsse S, Villani K, De  Greef J, Van Caneghem J, Vandecasteele C  Comparison of solidification/stabilization of fly ash and air pollution control residues from municipal solid waste incinerators with and without cement addition. J Mater Cycles Waste Manag 17:229–236 Billen P, Costa J, Van der Aa L, Van Caneghem J, Vandecasteele C   Electricity from poultry manure: a cleaner alternative to direct land application. J Clean Prod 96:467–475 Block C, Van Caneghem J, Van Brecht A, Wauters G, Vandecasteele  C  Incineration of hazardous waste: a sustainable process? Waste Biomass Valoriz 6:137–145 Bosmans A, Vanderreydt I, Geysen D, Helsen L  The crucial role  of Waste-to-Energy technologies in enhanced landfill mining: a technology review. J Clean Prod 55:10–23 Brooks AL, Wang S, Jambeck JR  The Chinese import ban and  its impact on global plastic waste trade. Sci Adv 4:eaat0131 Castaldi M, van Deventer J, Lavoie JM, Legrand J, Nzihou A, Pontikes  Y, Py X, Vandecasteele C, Vasudevan PT, Verstraete W  Progress and Prospects in the field of biomass and waste to energy and added-value materials. Waste Biomass Valoriz 8:1875–1884 Cembureau  Key facts and figures. https ://cembu reau.eu/ cemen t-101/key-facts -figur  es/. Accessed Nov 2017 CEPI  CEPI Sustainability Report 2013. European Paper  Industry. Advancing the Bioeconomy; Confederation of Euro - pean Paper Industries : Brussels, Belgium CPCU  District heating network—Production .  http://www.cpcu.fr/Le-resea u-de-chale ur/LA-PRODU CTION  .   Accessed Oct 2018 De Greef J, Villani K, Goethals J, Van Belle H, Van Caneghem J,  Vandecasteele C  Optimising energy recovery and use of chemicals, resources and materials in modern waste-to-energy plants. J Waste Manag 33:2416–2424  J. Van Caneghem et al. 1 3 De Greef J, Verbinnen B, Van Caneghem J  Waste-to-energy:  coupling waste treatment to highly efficient CHP. J Chem React  Technol. https ://doi.org/10.1515/ijcre -2017-0248 De Groof M, Vandecruys M  Inventarisatie huishoudelijke  afvalstoffen 2013. Danny Wille, OVAM, Mechelen Decree on soil quality  . http://wette n.overh eid.nl/ BWBR0 02292 9/2015-07-01. Accessed Mar 2018 Delgado-Aguilar M, Tarres Q, Pelach MÀ, Mutje P, Fullana-i- Palmer P  Are cellulose nanofibers a solution for a more  circular economy of paper products? Environ Sci Technol  49:12206–12213 Ecluse  A channel for green energy. Sustainability. http:// www.eclus e.be/susta inabi lity/. Accessed July 2017 European Commission  Closing the loop—an EU action plan  for the Circular Economy. COM 614. Brussels European commission  Directive of the European parliament  and of the council amending directive 2008/98/EC on waste. COM 595 final. Brussels European Commission  The role of waste-to-energy in the  circular economy. COM 34 final. Brussels Eurostat . http://ec.europ a.eu/euros  tat/data/datab ase. Accessed  July 2017 Geens T, Aerts D, Berthotc C, Bourguignond J, Goeyense L,  Lecomte P, Maghuin-Rogisterg G, Pironneth A, Pussemieri L  A review of dietary and non-dietary exposure to bis-phenol-A. Food Chem Toxicol 50:3725–3740 Geens T, Goeyens L, Kannan K, Neels H, Covaci A  Levels  of bisphenol-A in thermal paper receipts from Belgium and esti-mation of human exposure. Sci Total Environ 435–436:30–33 Goldenman G, Holland M, Lietzmann J, Meura L, Camboni M, Rei- hlen A, Bakker J  Study for the strategy for a non-toxic environment of the 7th Environment Action Programme. Final Report. Milieu Ltd, Brussels Grosso M  Sound and advanced municipal waste management:  moving from slogans and politics to practice and technique. Waste Manage Res 34:977–979 Haupt M, Kägi T, Hellweg S  Modular life cycle assessment of  municipal solid waste management. Waste Manag 79:815–827 Hofor  District heating in Copenhagen: Energy-efficient,  low-carbon and cost-effective. https ://www.hofor  .dk/wp-conte   nt/uploa ds/2016/09/distr  ict_heati ng_in_cph.pdf. Accessed Oct  2018 Ignatyev IA, Thielemans W, Vander Beke B  Recycling of  polymers: a review. Chemsuschem 7:1579–1593 Inashco . http://www.inash co.com/. Accessed Feb 2018 International Monetary Fund  Gross domestic product per cap- ita. https ://www.imf.org/exter  nal/pubs/ft/weo/2018/01/weoda ta/ index .aspx. Accessed Sept 2018 ISWA  Waste-to-energy state-of-the-art-report 6th edition.  https ://www.iswa.org/media /publi catio ns/knowl edge-base/.  Accessed Mar 2018 ISWA  Bottom ash from WtE plants, metal recovery and uti- lization, Report 2015 ISWA  China’s ban on recyclables, beyond the obvious. http:// www.iswa.org/home/news/news-detai l/artic le/china s-ban-on-recyc lable s-beyon d-the-obvio us/109/. Accessed Feb 2018 Jamieson AJ, Malkocs T, Piertney SB, Fujii T, Zhang Z  Bioac- cumulation of persistent organic pollutants in the deepest ocean fauna. Nat Ecol Evolut 1, Article number: 0051. https ://doi.org/10.1038/s4155 9-016-0051 Janz A, Günther M, Bilitewski B  Reaching cost-saving effects  by a mixed collection of light packagings together with residual household waste? Waste Manag Res 29:982–990 Jeswani HK, Azapagic A  Assessing the environmental sustain- ability of energy recovery from municipal solid waste in the UK. Waste Manag 50:346–363Kahle K, Kamuk B, Kallesøe J, Fleck E, Lamers F, Jacobsson L, Sahlén  J  Bottom ash from WtE plants—Metal recovery and uti - lization. ISWA Report. http://www.iswa.org/media /publi catio ns/knowl edge-base/. Accessed Mar 2018 Kaza S, Yao L, Bhada-Tata P, Van Woerden F  What a waste  2.0. A global snapshot of solid waste management to 2050. World Bank Group, Washington Klymko T, Dijkstra JJ, van Zomeren A  Guidance document  on hazard classification of MSWI bottom ash. ECN report nr  ECN-E–17-024 KplusV  Studie kostprijs en hoeveelheid zwerfvuil in 2013.  Danny Wille, OVAM, Mechelen, p 2014 Laurent Alexis, Bakas Ioannis, Clavreul Julie, Bernstad Anna, Niero  Monia, Gentil Emmanuel, Hauschild Michael Z, Christensen  Thomas H  Review of LCA studies of solid waste manage-ment systems—Part I: lessons learned and perspectives. Waste Manag 34:573–588 Lee SH, Themelis NJ, Castaldi MJ  High-temperature corrosion  in Waste-to-Energy boilers. J Therm Spray Technol 16:1–7 Li QQ, Loganath A, Chong YS, Tan J, Obbard JP  Persistent  organic pollutants and adverse health effects in humans. J Toxicol Environ Health Part A 69:1987–2005 Lombardi L, Carnevale E, Corti A  A review of technologies and  performances of thermal treatment systems for energy recovery from waste. Waste Manag 37:26–44 Malinauskaite J, Jouhara H, Czajczynska D, Stanchev P, Katsou E,  Rostkowski P, Thorne RJ, Colon J, Ponsa S, Al-Mansour F, Anguilano L, Krzyzynska R, Lopez IC, Vlasopoulos A, Spencer N  Municipal solid waste management and waste-to-energy in the context of a circular economy and energy recycling in Europe. Energy 141:2013–2044 MARTIN plants and technologies  Solutions for the recovery  of energy and materials from waste. http://www.marti ngmbh .de. Last actualized 26 Jan 2018 Merrild Hanna, Larsen Anna W, Christensen Thomas H  Assess- ing recycling versus incineration of key materials in municipal waste: the importance of efficient energy recovery and transport distances. Waste Manag 32:1009–1018 Pivnenko K, Pedersen GA, Eriksson E, Astrup TF  Bisphenol  A and its structural analogues in household waste paper. Waste Manag 44:39–47 Pivnenko K, Granby K, Eriksson E, Astrup TF  Recycling of  plastic waste: screening for brominated flame retardants .  Waste Manag 69:101–109 Quicker P, Neuerburg F, Noël Y, Huras A  Sachstand zu den  alternativen Verfahren für die thermische Entsorgung von Abfäl - len. Report Z 6–30 345/18 Rigamonti L, Niero M, Haupt M, Grosso M, Judl J  Recycling  processes and quality of secondary materials: food for thought for  waste-management-oriented life cycle assessment studies. Waste Manag 76:261–265 Schlummer M, Gruber L, Mäurer A, Wolz G, van Eldik R   Characterisation of polymer fractions from waste electrical and electronic equipment  and implications for waste manage-ment. Chemosphere 67:1866–1876 Schorcht F, Kourti I, Scalet BM, Roudier S, Delgado Sancho L   Best available techniques  reference document for the pro-duction of cement, lime and magnesium oxide. Joint Research Centre of the European Commission, Geel Seltenrich N  Incineration versus recycling: In Europe, a debate  over trash. YaleEnvironment360. Published at the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental studies. https ://e360.yale.edu/featu res/incin erati on_versu s_recyc ling__in_europ e_a_debat e_over_trash .   Accessed Sept 2018 Waste -to-energy is compatible and complementary with recycling in the circular economy   1 3 Singh J, Ordonez I  Resource recovery from post-consumer  waste: important lessons for the upcoming circular economy. J  Clean Prod 134:342–353 Themelis NJ, Ulloa PA  Methane generation in landfills. Renew - able Energy 32:1243–1257 UNEP  General technical guidelines on the environmentally  sound management of wastes of wastes consisting of, contain-ing or contaminated with persistent organic pollutants. UNEP/CHW.12/5/Add.2/Rev.1, Geneva US Environmental Protection Agency  Advancing sustainable  materials management: 2015 fact sheet. https ://www.epa.gov/sites /produ ction /files /2018-07/docum ents/2015_smm_msw_facts heet_07242 018_fnl_508_002.pdf. Accessed Mar 2018 Van Caneghem J, Block C, Van Brecht A, Wauters G, Vandecasteele C   Mass balance for POPs in hazardous and municipal waste incinerators. Chemosphere 78:701–708 Van Caneghem J, Block C, Van Brecht A, Van Royen P, Jaspers M,  Wauters G, Vandecasteele C  Mass balance for POPs in a real scale fluidised bed combustor co-incinerating automotive shredder residue. J Hazard Mater 181:827–835 Van Caneghem J, Brems A, Lievens P, Block C, Billen P, Vermeulen I,  Dewil R, Baeyens J, Vandecasteele C  Fluidized bed waste incinerators: design, operational and environmental issues. Prog Energy Combust Sci 38:551–582 Van Caneghem J, Verbinnen B, Cornelis G, de Wijs J, Mulder R, Billen  P, Vandecasteele C  Immobilization of antimony in waste- to-energy bottom ash by addition of calcium and iron containing  additives. Waste Manag 54:162–168 Van Houte P, Paque L  Parlementair onderzoek naar de Belgis- che vlees-, zuivel-, en eierproductie en naar de verantwoordeli-jkheid in het licht van de zogenaamde dioxinecrisis – Verslag. Belgische kamer van volksvertegenwoordigers. DOC 50 0018/007 Van Larebeke N, Hens L, Schepens P, Covaci A, Baeyens J, Ever - aert K, Bernheim JL, Vlietinck R, De Poorter G  The Bel-gian PCB and dioxin incident of January–June 1999: exposure data and potential impact on health. Environ Health Perspect 109:265–273 Vandecasteele C, Wauters G, Arickx S, Jaspers M, Van Gerven T   Integrated municipal solid waste treatment using a grate furnace incinerator: the Indaver case. Waste Manag 27:1366–1375 Vehlow J, Bergfeldt B, Jay J, Seifert H, Wanke T  Thermal treat- ment of electrical and electronic waste plastics. Waste Manage Res 18:131–140Verbinnen B, Billen P, Van Caneghem J, Vandecasteele C  Recy - cling of MSWI bottom ash: a review of chemical barriers, engi - neering applications and treatment technologies. Waste Biomass Valoriz 8:1453–1466 Vermeulen I, Van Caneghem J, Block C, Vandecasteele C  Indi- cation of PCDD/F formation through heterogeneous precursor condensation in a full scale hazardous waste incinerator. J Mater Cycles Waste Manage 16:167–171 Vervaet M, Andries A, Van Hasselt D, Smeets K  Inventorisa- tion of domestic waste . Ovam. http://www.ovam.be. Accessed Jan 2018 Vieira Cubas AL, de Medeiros Machado M, de Medeiros Machado M,  Gross F, Faverzani Magnago R, Siegel Moecke EH, Goncalvez de Souza I  Inertization of heavy metals present in galvanic sludge by DC thermal plasma. Environ Sci Technol 48:2853–2861 Viridor  Runcorn ERF. https ://virid or.co.uk/our-opera tions /energ   y/energ y-recov  ery-facil ities /runco rn-erf/. Accessed Oct 2018 Wang HC, Hwang JF, Chi KH, Chang MB  Formation and  removal of PCDD/Fs in a municipal waste incinerator during dif-ferent operating periods. Chemosphere 67:S177–S184 Wien Energie  How it works: Green heating—District heating.  https ://www.wiene nergi e.at/eport  al3/ep/chann elVie  w.do/pageT   ypeId /67856 /chann elId/-58152 . Accessed Oct 2018 Wilts H, Galinski L, Marin G, Paleari S, Zoboli R  Assessment  of waste incineration capacity and waste shipments in Europe. European Topic Centre on Waste and Materials in a Green  Economy ZAR  Ziftung Zentrum für nachhaltige Abfall- und Ressourcen- nutzung. Trockenaustrag in der KEZO, Hinwil. https ://zar-ch.ch/ zar/kompe  tenze nproj ekte/trock  enaus  trag/. Accessed Sept 2018 Zennegg M, Schluep M, Streicher-Porte M, Lienemann P, Haag R,  Gerecke AC  Formation of PBDD/F from PBDE in elec-tronic waste in recycling processes and under simulated extruding conditions. Chemosphere 116:34–39 Zhang D, Huang G, Xu H, Gong Q  Waste-to-Energy in China:  key Challenges and Opportunities. Energies 8:14182–14196 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to  jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. 

