Towards a circular economy in cities: Exploring local modes of governance in the transition towards a circular economy inconstruction and textile recycling Thomas Budde Christensen Roskilde University, Department of People and Technology, Postbox 260, Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark article info Article history: Received 14 January 2020Received in revised form24 February 2021 Accepted 6 April 2021 Available online 22 April 2021 Handling editor: Cecilia Maria Villas B ^oas de Almeida Keywords: Circular economyWasteRecycling Governance TextileDemolitionabstract Designing circular economy policies and planning approaches in cities is an emerging research ﬁeld and the aim of the present paper is to contribute to the existing body of literature by analysing multiple governance forms whereby municipalities can support and facilitate a local level transition to a circulareconomy. The purpose of this article is therefore to analyse how cities and municipalities can support and facilitate the circular economy through multiple modes of governance, e.g. through the use of own assets to support the circular economy; the use of the ownership of utilities and waste companies to supportthe circular economy; the use of rule enforcement and/or economic regulation or through facilitating,coordinating, collaborating and encouraging. The analysis in the article is based on two in-depth case studies of projects seeking circular economies, in which Danish municipalities collaborated with local stakeholders to close the material loop for demolition materials and textile waste. Overall, this study isbased on an action research approach that emphasises the bene ﬁts of co-innovation processes carried out between multiple stakeholders. The analysis of the case studies concluded that municipalities can function as an important change agent to support and facilitate a transformation towards a circulareconomy. ©2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Increasing pressure on resources and concerns about environ- mental impacts and climate change ( Steffen et al., 2015 ;UNEP, 2019 ) are prompting companies and governments to search for strategies to deliver sustainable development. The circular econ- omy is regarded as a promising concept for policymakers  and businesses t o close the material loops in consumption and production systems. Over the last decade, the circular economy concept has attracted increasing attention as a framework to understand and guide businesses and policymakers ( Bocken et al., 2016 ;Ghisellini et al., 2016 ;Korhonen et al., 2018 ). However, the central idea about ma- terial cycles and resource limitations has existed since the begin- ning of industrialisation . The origin of the CE concept can be traced back to theoretical contributions from Boulding  on the spaceship economy to later contributions from the limits to growth report in the 1970s , andto the industrial ecology ( Erkman, 1997 ;Frosch and Gallopoulos, 1989 ) and the cradle-to-cradle  literature. Also, the urban perspective on closed-loop systems, as illustrated by the urban metabolism concept, helped inform the creation of the development of the CE concept . The role of cities and urban systems has therefore been a central part of the CE concept since its early days. 2. Circular economies in cities There exist a wide variety of de ﬁnitions of the circular economy. Blomsma and Brennan  characterised the circular economy concept as an “umbrella concept ”that is used as a broad heuristic to develop strategies and policies at different scales, from global production and consumption systems to cities and municipalities.Kirchherr et al.  identi ﬁed no less than 114 different de ﬁni- tions of the circular economy and also found that circular economy deﬁnitions most often relate to the 4R framework (reduce, reuse, recycling and recover). This CE framework has strong connotations to the waste hierarchy, which is used as a steering principle to rank most desirable waste policies in the EU Waste Framework Directive E-mail address: tbc@ruc.dk . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Cleaner Production journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/l ocate/jclepro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127058 0959-6526/ ©2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 . Since all EU member states must adhere to the Waste Framework Directive, it is unsurprising that the circular economy activities in Europe have a strong bias towards this de ﬁnition of the circular economy. At its core, the circular economy concept has two main inter- linked aspects, namely the circular ﬂows of physical materials (the material aspect) and the economy of these ﬂows (the economic aspect). The material aspect has to do with the creation of closed- loop ﬂows. This involves ﬂows of raw materials, intermediate products, ﬁnal products , the use of the products and the management of the products as waste (in the linear system or semi-closed-loop systems) or as raw materials for the production of new products in the circular economy. The ma- terial aspect also involves the energy use associated with these ﬂows and the environmental issues that the ﬂows may cause as the materials run through the economy. The Ellen MacArthur Foun- dation  and McDonough et al.  ;Braungart et al.  divide material ﬂows into two main types: technical and biological ﬂows. The EMF “butter ﬂy”model, which can help illus- trate biological and technical material ﬂows, has become widely used by policymakers and academia. The butter ﬂy model tends to focus on the waste ﬂows of end-of-life products and their pathways back into the production system . However, the model pays less attention to how by-products and waste are interchanged between companies in the production system. Such a perspective is provided by the industrial ecology literature, which emphasises the processes by which materials from one company can be used as raw material by another company ( Clift and Druckman, 2015 ). The economic aspect of the circular economy has to do with the economic costs and revenues generated as materials ﬂow through the economy, the business models that are deployed ( Bocken et al., 2016 ), and the regulation and legislation that constitute the eco- nomic framework conditions for the businesses. Several studies have indicated that the transition to a circular economy opens up opportunities for the development and adoption of new ways of generating revenue and with this, new business models ( Bocken et al., 2016 ;WBCSD, 2017 ). Very often circular economy systems are characterised by a complex relationship between the private sector and the public sector, where the public sector not only provides the framework conditions but also takes an active role in creating partnerships and support systems to facilitate the transition to a circular economy. 2.1. The role of cities in the circular economy With around half the world ’s population living in urban areas, cities are a main contributor to environmental problems, resource consumption, energy use and GHG emissions ( UNEP, 2019 ;Wang et al., 2018 ). While on the one hand cities often have higher per capita consumption, cities on the other hand also often exhibit higher resource ef ﬁciency per unit of income and thereby provide a great potential for ef ﬁciency . The UN Global Envi- ronment Outlook 2019 forecast increasing future urbanisation andargues that this development if managed poorly would be associ- ated with high risks, but also that the urbanisation trend has a potential to contribute positively to helping solve environmental problems and to reducing resource consumption if local govern- ments can manage to develop and implement technologies, that due to economies of scale, would be unfeasible in rural and less densely populated environments . Many cities are today strongly involved in circular economy activities. Bernhardt et al.  identi ﬁed 40 examples of city- level circular economies in diverse cities across the globe, covering topics such as city-wide circular strategies, urbanrefurbishment, public procurement, utilities and municipal waste. A number of pioneering cities, such as Amsterdam and Glasgow, have used material ﬂow analysis methods to identify their main resource ﬂows and to target projects and policies accordingly. There are several reasons why cities and local governments can play an important role in the transition to a circular economy. First, most cities and local governments are responsible for (or at least heavily involved with) the management of waste. They are thereby positioned at the end of the linear material ﬂows, and are responsible for managing the massive amounts of waste that are produced in the economy, and therefore they have a natural in- terest in the fate of these ﬂows. In most countries, local govern- ments also must meet recycling targets and they are therefore naturally involved in circular economy activities. The task of handling waste ﬂows in cities has increased over time and is ex- pected to increase further, both in volume and importance, with the growth in urban populations across the globe. The UN estimates that two-thirds of the global population will live in cities by 2050 , putting a massive strain on local governments to handle and recycle material ﬂows. Second , circular economy activ- ities overlap with many other policy objectives that cities typicallyalso have to deal with, e.g. energy, water, transport and air pollu- tion. For instance, waste management has strong linkages to climate change mitigation as many waste ﬂows are treated in waste incineration plants  or biogas plants . Circular economy activities also impinge on sustainability plans, such as Local Agenda 21 plans or SDG city plans. The economic aspect of the circular economy also has an in ﬂuence on many economic policies at the city level, such as employment policies, business support and entrepreneurship policies. Third , cities and local governments often act as a strong bridge between citizens and private sector organi- sations. Cities and local governments often act as facilitators that can enable collaboration between stakeholders from the private sector, knowledge institutions and citizens. The degrees to which municipalities engage in such activities differ from country to country and even between municipalities within the same country. In countries such as the Netherlands and in the Nordic countries , there is a well-established tradi- tion of municipalities engaging with companies, knowledge in- stitutions and citizens and acting as a facilitator to bring parties together and to drive action . 2.2. Local governance of the circular economy The research on circular cities often focuses on developing in- dicator systems to assess, monitor, evaluate and compare circular economy initiatives at the city level. Gravagnuolo et al.  analysed the CEs among a group of selected port cities to eval- uate their criteria and indicators for achieving a CE. Wang et al.  studied CEs among Chinese cities and developed an indi- cator system to evaluate and monitor the CE progress at a city level. Marin and De Meulder Marin and De Meulder  studied urban circularity in four selected city initiatives with an emphasison the spatial design dimension of urban circularity. Petit-Boix and Leipold  reviewed circular economy activities in cities across the globe and found a wide geographical representation of cities engaged with circular economy activities across the globe, with particular concentrations clustered in Europe and China. The cir- cular economy activities identi ﬁed by Petit-Boix and Leipold  covered a broad range of strategies, but primarily targeting infra- structure, industry, consumption and urban planning. Obersteg et al.  analysed the CE, using a PESTEL-O method, in a comparative study of six European cities with public sector involvement in CE initiatives and found a lack of policyT.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 2 coordination between the levels of government, a lack of horizontal coordination between cities and a lack of public sector coordination and support for private CE initiatives. The current CE literature on cities and municipalities can be divided into two primary lines of research. The ﬁrst line of literature focuses on developing indicator systems to monitor and evaluate the CE at a city level . The second line of literature aims to compare and identify the similarities and differences between projects, sectors and initiatives that are the targets of cities in CE-related activities ( Bolger and Doyon, 2019 ; Gravagnuolo et al., 2019 ;Obersteg et al., 2019 ). However, less attention is given in the literature to exploring how cities and municipalities collaborate with stakeholders to accelerate the development of a CE and further research on municipal and city- level governance is required to accelerate the transformation to a circular economy. Consequently, this article aims to contribute to closing this knowledge gap. Cities and local governments can play an important role as change agents to create sustainable cities ( Bulkeley and Betsill, 2005 ).Bolger and Doyon  conducted a comparative study of the cities of Malm €o and Melbourne to analyse how municipal planning could support the transition to a CE and found that stra- tegic urban planning could function as a vehicle for the trans- formation of CE objectives into speci ﬁc actions. In attempting to understand how the role of a strategic planner and change agent unfolds, scholars have moved from focussing on hierarchical, topedown-oriented command-and-control regulation, often labelled “government ”, to a perspective focussing on non- hierarchical modes of coordination and decision-making, termed “governance ”(Bulkeley and Kern, 2006 ;Corfee-Morlot et al., 2009 ; Zvolska et al., 2019 ).Bulkeley and Kern  studied the role of municipalities in climate change mitigation policies and developed a typology for local governments, whereby actions could be divided into four main modes of governance as described below. This ty- pology based on the four roles can be applied to other areas of municipal planning as well, although the speci ﬁc character of the four modes of governance may differ. In a study of the sharing economies in four Swedish cities, Palm et al.  extended the typology by adding “governing by partnership ”; however, this could also be characterised as a sub-form of “governing by enabling ”.Cavicchi et al.  used the same framework to analyse sustainability and bioenergy development in Emilia Romagna, Italy. Based on Bulkeley and Kern  , this paper applies the following typology for the modes of governance: 1)Self-governance ,d eﬁned as the capacity of a municipality to govern its own assets and activities. This mode of governance is often described as governing the municipality as a company, focussing on activities that take place within the legal bound- aries of the municipal organisation. 2)Governing by provision ,d eﬁned as governance through the provision of services and resources. This mode of governance often involves governance through municipality-owned agencies and companies in, for example, wastewater, utilities, heating companies, transport companies and waste companies. 3)Governing by authority ,d eﬁned as governance using authority, such as regulation. This mode of governance involves govern- ing through rules and enforcement, including direct and eco- nomic regulation , but also through planning activities that are legally binding on companies and citizens. 4)Governing through enabling, deﬁned as governance through facilitating, coordination, collaboration and encouraging. This mode of governance can take many diverse forms, spanning from formal partnerships to informal community engagement.The distribution of authority between the levels of governance varies from country to country, and the potential for municipalities to engage in, for example, legally binding planning activities or to govern by authority may be quite different. Scandinavian countries have a tradition of a deep distribution of power to local governments. The purpose of the present paper is to explore how cities and municipalities can combine multiple modes of governance to support and facilitate a local level transition from a linear economy towards a circular economy, in which physical ﬂows are looped back into the production of new products and services. The analysis in this paper is based on two in-depth case studies of Danish mu- nicipalities working in collaboration with local stakeholders to close the material loops of two targeted waste streams. The ﬁrst case study explores the recycling of textile waste, while the second case study explores a circular economy in the construction and demolition ﬁeld. The case studies are discussed in detail, followed by a discussion about how municipalities can support and facilitate the transition to a circular economy using different modes of governance. 2.3. Local governments in Denmark A report from the Nordic Ministers Council ( Christiansen et al., 2019 ) focussing on circular economies in municipalities in the Nordic countries identi ﬁed a broad variety of projects and activities targeting the circular economy, stretching from small-scale projects with a few partners to large-scale inter-municipal projects. Like most Scandinavian countries, the political system in Denmark distributes relatively large autonomy to local govern- ments  compared to the political systems in many other countries. Denmark is divided into 5 regions and 98 munic- ipalities. The regions ’main obligation is to manage healthcare , whereas the municipalities have a broad spectrum of responsibilities. This also implies that the central government and the municipalities are the most important government levels for promoting circular economy activities. In Denmark, the municipalities are the primary level of governmentinvolved in waste management, with the overall responsibility for all household waste. The municipalities must adopt waste plans that cover four years and point 10 years into the future. Addition- ally, Danish municipalities usually hold joint ownership of waste management companies, which operate the recycling stations in Denmark as well as the 19 Danish combined heat and power waste incineration plants. This ownership relation provides an often-used opportunity for governing by provision. 3. Methods This article presents the results from a multi-stakeholder, co- innovation project called “Partnership for Circular Municipalities ” that was undertaken in the Capital Region of Denmark. The purpose of the partnership was to support, demonstrate and develop therole of local governments  in promoting the tran- sition to a circular economy through partnerships between mu- nicipalities, waste companies and knowledge institutions. The project was ﬁnanced by Regional Council Development Funds. The consortium comprised ﬁve municipalities (Bornholm, Copenhagen, Albertslund, Rudersdal and Hørsholm), three waste companies , and three knowledge institutions . Four demonstration projects were carried out as part of the project:T.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 3 1) Recycling construction and demolition waste 2) Promotion of a circular value chain in the textiles industry, with a combined focus on the recycling/upcycling of textile waste and the green public procurement of reused textiles 3) Direct recycling and upcycling of waste fractions 4) Circular business development, focussing on resource ef ﬁciency. To increase the competences and knowledge of the circular economy among staff in the municipalities, three masterclasses were conducted in the project, focussing on the circular economy in municipalities, circular public procurement and circular organisations. Finally, the project intended to anchor the circular economy concept strategically and politically in the participating organisa- tions. This was accomplished through a series of meetings with decision-makers in the participating municipalities, through the establishment of an advisory board consisting of decision-makers in local municipalities and through the development of a commu- nication strategy for the project. This article presents the results of two of the demonstration cases that were conducted in the project, namely the textile case study and the construction and demolition case study . This article analyses these case studies to show how local govern- ments can combine multiple modes of governance to facilitate a transition towards a circular economy. The two cases were chosen for analysis in this article for several reasons: both cases involved multiple stakeholders, both cases involved co-innovation processes in which multiple stakeholders collaborated towards a common goal and both cases illustrated multiple modes of local governance . The case studies address the two key aspects of the circular economy concept: the material aspect and the economic aspect. In theﬁrst case, the material aspect relates to the physical ﬂows of textiles in the Danish waste system and potential scenarios for future ﬂows. The economic aspect relates to the costs of these ﬂows. In the second case, the material aspect relates to the physical ﬂows of demolition materials generated from demolished buildings on the Danish island of Bornholm, while the economic aspect re- lates to the potential costs and economics related to the recircu- lation of these materials. Using an in-depth case-study approach, the two cases explored how municipalities can contribute to closing the local materials loop and contribute contextualised knowledge about the barriers and potential for the development of a circular economy in these ﬁelds. Following Gibbons et al.  , the case studies were conducted as a modus 2 type of research, whereby the researcher and the local stakeholders collaborate in the production of knowledge. Modus 2 research can also be seen as a type of action research, which is a research approach that has been used by several researchers for the stu dy of sustainab ility gove rnance. The modus 2 approach allowed following an alternative to the classical research approach, whereby the researcher could remain an independent observer who collects data to answer research questions derived from academia itself. Modus 2 action research involves a collab- orative effort in de ﬁning research questions and is based on a multi-stakeholder approach and co-innovation processes. Witt- mayer at al . deﬁne action research as: “the collaborative production of scienti ﬁcally and socially relevant knowledge, transformative action and new social relations, through a participatory process addressing a particular question formed in the interaction between researchers and other actors ”, thus empha- sizing the participatory elements of knowledge production in a joint project with non-academic partners. This research approach implies that the author was actively involved in the initial stages of formulating the aims and targets for the overall project as well as for the individual cases in collabora-tion with the local stakeholders, and in the collection and inter- pretation of data as well as being responsible for the ﬁnal evaluation of the project as a whole. Additionally, the overall aim of the present project was two-fold: on the one hand, to generatescienti ﬁc knowledge about local governance for transitioning to a circular economy and on the other hand, to support a real transition through testing and demonstrating the process. The author was additionally involved in the design and implementation of master classes and the establishment of an Advisory Board for Circular Economy in Local Governments, with both initiatives established as a part of a larger project . 3.1. The textile case methodology The textile case was carried out as a collaboration between Rødovre Municipality, the largest Danish waste company Vestfor- brændingen, Roskilde University and a private consultant (Affa- ldskontoret). The project was divided into 2 steps: First, a collection scheme was established to map and assess the quantity and quality of waste textiles. The collection scheme was implemented by Rødovre Municipality for used clothing and shoes. Two different collection systems were tested, one for one-family homes and another for terrace homes and high-rise homes. Textile waste was collected at the doorstep from 530 one-family homes and addi- tionally 8 containers were placed at established collection facilities servicing 356 high-rise homes and 552 terrace homes. Information folders were produced and distributed to citizens. The two different collection systems were chosen since the socio-economic charac- teristics typically differ between high-rise homes and one-family homes. Typically, collection rates for source-separated municipalsolid waste are higher in one-family homes than in high-rise homes. Second, a scenario analysis was conducted by Roskilde Table 1 Details of the two case studies. Textile case Construction case Objective To identify the potentials for the collection and recycling of textile waste and to explore how a future textile reuse/recycling system could beestablishedThe case aimed to close the loop for the ﬂow of construction materials in the Danish island of Bornholm and to bridge the gap between the generation ofdemolition waste and the construction of new buildings Involved stakeholdersRødovre Muncipality, Vestforbrændingen , Roskilde University and a private consultantBornholm municipality, Roskilde University, BOFA  and two private consultants Main activities 1) Testing a collection scheme for textile waste 2) Scenario analysis1) Testing pre-demolition audits and selective demolition to generate data about recycling opportunities and to establish a material bank 2) Assessment of the potentials for recycling construction materials3) Establishing a recycling network for demolition wasteT.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 4 University to assess the current national ﬂow of waste textiles and to explore future scenarios for the recycling of waste textiles. The scenarios were based on a material ﬂow analysis method ( Brunner and Rechberger, 2016 ), where the ﬂows of textiles in Denmark were assessed and illustrated by Sankey diagrams. Data for the scenarios were obtained primarily from the Danish Ministry of Environment and an assessment of the potential recycling and reuse technologies . Two scenarios for 2025 were generated to quantify the total national opportunities for the recycling of waste textiles in Denmark. This 2025 date was chosen as the target year since the EU Waste Framework Directive requires the separate collection of textiles from 2025. The ﬁrst scenario assumed continued increasing textile consumption, but with the existing NGO-based collection system in parallel with a collection system operated by the municipally owned waste companies. Based on the results from a collection test in Rødovre, a higher collection ratio (increasing from 3% to 16% in the municipal system) was also assumed. It was further assumed that it would be economically feasible to chemically recycle the poorest quality  collected textiles. A sorting test at a private textile collector was carried out during the development of the scenarios to test and validate the existing data on the ﬁbre types and the quality of the collected textile waste textiles  . Since this quality assessment proved the waste complied with the quality charac- teristics provided in the national government data, no larger quality assessment was considered necessary. The test results were then used to calibrate the assumptions regarding the potential for chemical and mechanical recycling. 3.2. The construction case methodology The construction case was carried out as a collaboration be- tween Roskilde University, Bornholm Municipality, the waste company BOFA and two private consultants. The case aimed to close the loop for the ﬂow of construction materials on the Danish island of Bornholm and to bridge the gap between the production of demolition waste and the construction of new buildings. To do so, three main tasks were carried out: 1) a test was made involving pre-demolition audits and selective demolition, whereby three selected buildings were demolished to generate data about recy- cling opportunities and to establish a material bank; 2) an assess- ment was carried out of the potential for the recycling of the construction materials. This assessment was based on a series of interviews with local stakeholders in the construction sector. The interviews were carried out as semi-structured interviews, and the results were analysed and documented in a separate background report. The results from the qualitative study were afterwards combined with quantitative, statistical data on the construction activities on the island, which was likewise compiled in another background report; 3) a green construction network was con- structed. The network was established through a series of work- shops with local companies in the construction sector. This part of the project aimed to convey knowledge from tasks 1 and 2 and to explore the potentials and barriers to transitioning towards a cir- cular construction sector. 4. Case study 1: recycling waste textiles Textiles are a product category associated with high environ- mental impacts throughout the value chain ( Sandin and Peters, 2018 ). The production of natural ﬁbres often involves a large con- sumption of energy, fertilizers, water and pesticides. During the processing of ﬁbres and textiles , the use of energy, water and chemicals causes further environmental impacts(S ̌;ajn, 2019 ). The expected increase in textile consumption in the coming years will likely contribute to further environmental problems . Textiles are therefore one of the most important ﬂows that cities and local governments across the globe need to address in order to create a circular economy. Sandin and Peters  distinguish between open-loop recycling and closed-loop recycling, where closed-loop recycling refers to recycling systems where fabrics or ﬁbres are used again to produce new textiles and open-loop recycling systems refer to systems where fabrics or textiles are used to produce other prod- ucts . 4.1. The textiles ﬂow in Denmark The recycling of textiles is an area that is attracting increasing attention and so textiles were chosen as a target material ﬂow to assess in this project. The upcoming municipal waste plans in Denmark for the period 2019 e2030 are expected to focus on increasing textile recycling and at the same time improving the quality of the recycling processes to enable compliance with EU requirements for the separate collection of textiles by 2025  In this project, the potential for the collection and recycling of waste textiles was explored in a collaboration between Rødovre Municipality, the largest Danish waste company Vestforbrændingen, and Roskilde University. The reuse of second- hand textiles in Denmark  is primar- ily organised by NGOs that collect, sort and export second-hand textiles to third-world countries. At the same time, some used textiles are shared between friends and family members and a smaller fraction is sold in digital marketplaces . Approximately 40% of household waste textiles are incinerated together with mixed municipal solid waste. Fig. 1 illustrates the ﬂow of textiles in Denmark in 2016. Here, used textiles follow four main routes. The largest percentage is incinerated in Denmark , while part of the textiles is reused nationally, a large fraction  is collected by NGOs and exported to third-world countries, typically following transit in Eastern European countries, where the textiles are sorted, and a smaller fraction is mechanically recycled in Denmark in an open loop, mainly for non-clothing products, such as cloths. Several reports show that there are a number of commercial reuse options for waste textiles in addition to being used as cloths and the like epartly where the ﬁbres are recycled in new textiles and partly where the ﬁbres/clothing are included in other products. In addition to pre-sorting, there is currently only limited sorting, processing and recycling capacities in Denmark. The lack of municipal experience with textile recycling and the fact that sort- ing and recycling generally take place abroad makes it dif ﬁcult for the municipalities to assess the possibilities for a better utilisation of waste textiles. 4.2. The collection test Theﬁrst step in the project was to conduct a pilot collection scheme in Rødovre Municipality to assess the quantities and quality of household waste textiles. The ﬁndings from the collection test are presented in the Table 2 below. Mechanical recycling makes it possible to recycle ﬁbres from worn-out textiles, and future collection schemes under the revised waste plans post-2025 will need to collect these fractions as well. A general challenge for textile collection in Denmark is that Danish citizens are used to only handing in clothes that they consider as being in good shape  because the current NGO-based collection system is set up for reuse in third-world countries. Citizens therefore need to change theirT.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 5 sorting practice and to be encouraged to hand in worn-out clothes along with clothes suitable for reuse. Based on the relatively low volumes collected in the test sorting scheme carried out in this project, it can be concluded that additional education and infor- mation is needed to make citizens change practice. 4.3. Scenarios for the future textile ﬂow with increased recycling To analyse the potential for the increased recycling of textiles in Denmark, a set of scenarios was developed based on a baseline projection and variations with increasing the amount of textilesrecycled by mechanical and chemical processes. Theﬁrst scenario  was based on the assumption that the current NGO-based system will be maintained, while a second scenario was developed to illustrate the potential of a new system whereby all textiles are collected under the municipal system and recycled in Denmark. This range was partly due to the uncertainty related to the actual fate of the exported textiles and partly to ac- count for the uncertainties related to how these are end-of-life treated after reuse . Scenario C  can be understood as a more ambitious and challenging scenario that will require larger changes to be made tothe existing system. Because Scenario C is based on a national system, it is easier for municipalities to verify that the collected textiles are actually recycled and that the system will create a closed loop where textile ﬁbres are continuously recycled and not landﬁlled after being reused once, as is likely the case with the exported textiles today. The developed scenarios were discussed with the project partnership with representatives from the largest Danish waste company Vestforbrændingen, Rødovre Municipality and the two knowledge institutions Roskilde University and Gate21 in order to clarify the potential future policy options when imple- menting the EU Waste Framework Directive requirements for the separate collection of textiles by 2025. These discussions concluded that overall political decisions on the structure of the waste system need to be taken, especially with regards to the distribution of the roles and responsibilities between private collectors  and the municipally owned waste companies. Additionally, Rødovre Municipality used the ﬁndings from the collection test to establish and implement a textile collection scheme covering the entire municipality as part of their waste management plan. The data for the material ﬂow analysis were quite rough and the scenarios were based on certain assumptions, which can naturally lead to signi ﬁcant uncertainties. The two most important Fig. 1. Scenario A: 2016 Textile ﬂow in Denmark . Table 2 Findings from the collection test . Collected in test (kg/ household/yr)Scaled up to the whole municipality  Collected with bulky waste  1.3 10 Collected in containers from high-rise homes (900 homes in test; 10,500 if scaled up to the whole municipality)6.5 70 Collected at recycling stations in municipality plus other organisations ’containers 54 Assumed collected by NGOs and shops ebased on a national average of 13 kg/household/yr 240T.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 6 Fig. 2. Scenario B: 2025 Baseline textile ﬂow in Denmark. Fig. 3. Scenario C: 2025 Ambitious system with the national recycling of textiles.T.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 7 uncertainties are related to 1) technological uncertainties about whether the chemical recycling of textiles will be commercially available at a large scale within the target time frame and 2) po- litical uncertainties related to whether implementation of a na- tional closed-loop system is realistic as this would require a signiﬁcant change to the current system, and in scenario C, a showdown with the NGO-based collection system. Scenarios B and C were included to present and illustrate the potential in two ul- timately different systems and to quantify the potential of a na- tional closed-loop system. The scenarios were presented to decision-makers in the waste company; however, a ﬁnal decision on the structure of the textile recycling system was still not taken. The textile case illustrated two main modes of municipal governance, namely governance through provision and governance through authority. The ﬁrst step in the project, in which Rødovre Municipality established a pilot collection scheme, illustrated governance through authority. Here, the collection scheme was legally binding, and citizens covered by the collection scheme were obliged to follow the instructions communicated and enforced by the municipality. The second part of the textile case, where Rødovre Municipality collaborated with Roskilde University and the publiclyowned waste company Vestforbrændingen, can be regarded as a combination of governing by provision (as Rødovre Municipality was also a part owner of the waste company Vestforbrændingen) and governance through enabling. 5. Case study 2: recycling construction and demolition waste Measured by volume, construction and demolition waste  is the most signi ﬁcant waste fraction in Europe, representing approximately one-third of all waste generated ( European Commission, 2017 ), while in Denmark, CDW represents 37% of all waste produced. CDW covers a broad variety of materials, including concrete, bricks, plastics, metals, glass and gypsum. Despite the potential for the recycling of these materials being promising, in the EU only around half is recycled . Furthermore, the recycling practices associated with CDW in Europe often result in a downcycling of the construction materials to a lower quality and functionality; whereby instead of being looped back into high quality use, such as the construction of new buildings, high-value construction materials are used as low-value road base and ﬁlling materials . As a conse- quence of this practice, economic value is destroyed and the po- tential for increased resource ef ﬁciency and avoided environmental impacts is underutilised . The island of Bornholm was determined to become a test island for the circular economy. The municipality had adopted an ambi- tious waste strategy called “Bornholm Showing the Way eWithout Waste 2032 ”, where it set out its aims to recycle all waste fractions by 2032 and to eliminate the need for waste incineration and land ﬁll. The case study aimed to support this vision by exploring the possibilities for creating closed-loop value chains from the demolition to construction of new buildings in a public eprivate collaboration between the waste sector, the mu- nicipality , the con- struction industry, knowledge institutions and citizens. Closing the loop in the construction sector is a complex task that requires changes across a diverse group of stakeholders. Currently, the vast majority of construction materials generated from demo- lition is crushed and downcycled to lower value and functionality. Therefore, changes to demolition practices are needed, while at the same time practices among the companies involved in the con- struction of new buildings are needed to ensure the demand for recycled construction materials. Additionally, issues such as the quality , durability andcertiﬁcation of materials need to be handled to allow the recycling of CDW. 5.1. Exploring selective demolition practices Bornholm municipality manages a demolition fund that ﬁnan- cially supports the demolition of worn-out houses, mainly in rural areas of the island. Priority in the demolition fund is given to buildings that contain building materials and building components with a high conservation value. Using the demolition fund, this case-study developed and tested selective demolition practices, created a warehouse for demolished construction materials and created links to private stakeholders involved in the construction of new buildings and in the renovation of old buildings that poten- tially would be able to use the materials, whereby a circular value chain could be established. The municipality ’s use of the demolition fund could be characterised as self-governance since the munici- pality uses its own assets as a way to in ﬂuence the local con- struction sector. Theﬁrst building was demolished in October 2018 applying selective demolition techniques and two additional buildings weredemolished in the summer/autumn of 2019. Environmental screening was performed prior to demolition to identify any haz- ardous substances in the materials, such as PCB, asbestos or heavy metals, followed by resource mapping. The environmental screening is mandatory according to Danish law for buildings larger than 10 m 2or if the renovation generates more than 1 ton of demolished materials . The resource mapping comprised two categories: one category con- taining materials for reuse and one category for recycling where additional work is necessary before the materials can be reused. Table 3 illustrates the results of the resource screening against the result of the selective demolition from the ﬁrst demolition project. The selected demolition generated less material for reuse and recycling than anticipated in the resource screening. The wooden ﬂoors for example turned out to be in less good shape and therefore only 20 m2out of the 110 m2identi ﬁed in the resource screening were taken out for recycling. 5.2. De ﬁning value from demolished materials A central issue found during the ﬁrst resource screening and demolition was the dif ﬁculty associated with determining the value of materials. In the project, the value of the demolished materials was assessed by carrying out an internet search for the prices of similar materials. In all three cases, a positive business case was identi ﬁed when assessing the potential sales value of the con- struction materials against the cost of conducting a selective de- molition, logistics and storage of materials. However, assessing the value of materials turned out to be a complex challenge. First, the value of the construction materials was determined by the quality of the material and the amount of labour  needed to separate the valuable material from the other materials in the demolition process in order to secure a satisfactory quantity of the demolished material. Second, a larger quantity makes it easier to attract po- tential buyers. The value of simple and standardised materials, suchrafter, bricks, tiles and wooden ﬂoors, was easier to establish than for more complex products, such as doors and windows. Even a simple product, such as tiles, may require detailed knowledge to assess their value. The ﬁrst house that was demolished in the project, for example, included a special type of locally produced tiles  that are in high demand when historic ﬁshermen ’s houses are renovated. A correct value-assessment during the resource scanning therefore necessitates a detailed knowledge about the local market for construction materials. ThisT.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 8 may also be the case for products such as windows and doors, where knowledge of the local construction sector is needed to assess the value. 5.3. Looping construction materials back into the construction of new buildings A main task in the project was to bridge the gap between de- molition and construction. The municipality took an active role in exploring several options. Initially, the demolished construction materials were handled and stored by the local waste company BOFA in a facility connected to the local recycling station while potential users/buyers were identi ﬁed. The group of potential users/buyers included local construction markets, upcyclers, citi- zens, the municipality itself and professional companies in the construction sector. A private enterprise with a business model aimed at recycling used bricks was contacted by the municipality and established a branch of ﬁce on the island. A partnership agreement between the municipality and the company was created to make sure that the bricks from the demolition demonstration projects would be treated and reused in the construction of new buildings. In these processes, the municipality took an active role in establishing contacts with companies that could potentially use the demolished materials and acted as a facilitator. To make sure that knowledge about the project and resources were disseminated to local construction companies, a network initiative was started by the municipality. A mapping exercise was commenced by the municipality to provide an overview of the local construction and demolition sector. This activity resulted in two reports. Local companies in the construction sector were invited to participate in a series of workshops to increase knowledge sharing, build competences and to create a circular value chain from de- molition to construction. The workshops were organised by themunicipality and as a result, a local green construction network was established covering companies involved in demolition, construc- tion companies, architects and public authorities. 5.4. The role of municipalities in the transition towards a circular economy Bornholm Municipality played a crucial role in this case and was actively involved in all stages of the process. The fact that Bornholm is an island in ﬂuenced the creation of the green construction network, as the group of potential stakeholders in the construction industry to a large extent was limited by the geographical bound- aries of the island. This also implied that many of the local stake- holders knew each other personally.The demolition case illustrated how the municipality could use different modes of governance to in ﬂuence the transition from a linear to a circular economy. In practice, the municipality combined all four main governance modes: self-governance (using the de- molition fund to support selective demolition), governing by pro- vision (using the ownership to the local waste company BOFA as a storage facility for the demolished construction materials), gov- erning by authority (using waste planning and the waste man- agement authority during demolition procedures) and governing through enabling (creating networks and partnerships between local stakeholders in the construction and demolition sector). Throughout the entire project, the most important role of the municipality was that of an enabler and change agent who could contact stakeholders and facilitate increased communication be- tween stakeholders. 6. Discussion: the role of cities and local governments in the transformation towards a circular economy Recent research has indicated that cities and local governments can play an important role in the creation of closed-loop production and consumption systems ( Bolger and Doyon, 2019 ;Petit-Boix and Leipold, 2018 ). In political science, the traditional state-centred research, which typically sees the national state as a single sover- eign authority, has been contested by researchers arguing that a broader perspective on governance is needed to fully understand the complex functioning of the public sector and to understand the interaction between public authorities and stakeholders in the private sector . This movement has led to a change in perspective from “government ”to“governance ”and as part of this process highlighted the role of cities and local govern- ments. The exact role of local governments may differ from country to country due to the varying relationships between central gov- ernments and local governments resulting in different degrees of ﬁnancial interdependence, different administrative structures, etc (Bulkeley and Kern, 2006 ; Ehnert et al., 2018 ). Despite these na- tional differences, there is a clear trend that cities and local gov- ernments are increasingly de ﬁning policies, taking action, creating demonstration projects and collaborating in partnerships with private companies, citizens and knowledge institutions to facilitate and support the transition towards a circular economy ( Bernhardt et al., 2018 ;Petit-Boix and Leipold, 2018 ). The so-called gover- nance perspective not only pays increasing attention to the role of local governments but also emphasises the changing understand- ing of the role of local governments, from traditional command- and-control regulation to non-hierarchical modes of coordination and decision-making .Table 3 Results from the ﬁrst demolition: expected resources versus achieved. Part Material Expected, resource mapping Demolished, achieved amounts Outside parts Rafter Rafter  31 pieces 23 piecesCellar, outer wall Nature stone, mortar 63 m 30m3 Facade wall Red bricks 63 m358 m3 Outer stairs Granite 7 pieces 7 piecesInside parts Beams Painted wood beams 14 pieces 14 pieces Partition Claystone 125 m 37.6 m3 Mirrors on walls, painted wood 12 lbm 9 lbmGerichter 2 pieces 2 pieces Floors Wooden ﬂoors 110 m 220 m2 Tiles 15 m25m2 Doors, inside Doors and frames 16 pieces 16 pieces Other Woodburning stove 1 piece 1 piece Source: Bornholm MunicipalityT.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 9 6.1. Local governments ’potential for closing material loops The two case studies above indicate that the potential for closing the loops of speci ﬁc urban material ﬂows through planning tar- geted activities initiated by local governments and implemented in collaboration with local stakeholders. The textile project case study indicated that a focussed strategy aimed at increasing the domestic recycling of natural and synthetic ﬁbres using a mix of chemical and mechanical treatment processes could contribute signi ﬁcantly to a continued and increased recycling of textile ﬁbres. The imple- mentation of such a strategy would increase recycling rates and ensure that exported textiles that today have an unknown and uncertain fate could be handled domestically, where recycling rates could be monitored and documented. This led to developing our ambitious scenario C, which could additionally support the implementation of the EU Waste Framework Directive, which speci ﬁcally addresses the recycling of textile waste. However, the developed scenarios also highlighted the need for clarifying the roles and responsibilities of all parties, especially with regard to the question of ef ﬁciency in having two parallel collection systems, one operated by the publicly owned waste companies focussed onrecycling and one operated by NGOs focussed on the export of reusable textiles to third-world countries. Further research is needed in this area. The demolition case study indicated the potential for an increased recycling of construction and demolition waste. The demonstration case illustrated that applying new procedures for environmental screening, resource mapping and selective demoli- tion could increase the value of the produced demolition materials and generate demolition waste that potentially can be sent back in the chain to be used in the construction of new buildings at a higher level in the waste hierarchy. The demonstration project indicated that demolition materials that would otherwise have been crushed and used as ﬁlling materials can be recycled, provided that the procedures for resource mapping and selective demolition are followed and that the stakeholders involved possess the relevant knowledge, competencies and expertise to carry out such proced- ures and are able to accurately assess the value of the demolished construction materials. A lesson learned from the project is that increasing the knowledge capacity of local demolition companies is important to ensure selective demolition and reuse can be identi- ﬁed. Traditional demolition practices follow a simple model and the people involved typically only possess limited knowledge about the value of the construction materials and therefore have limited ca- pabilities to conduct a reliable assessment of the potential value of the construction materials. 6.2. The role of local governments in a circular economy The two case studies also illustrate multiple ways in which cities and local governments can act as change agents on their own as well as through interaction with external stakeholders in order to support the transition to a circular economy, thereby adding to the existing research on the role of local governments in the transitiontowards a circular economy ( Bolger and Doyon, 2019 ;Gravagnuolo et al., 2019 ). Whereas existing research on the role of local gov- ernment in the circular economy point towards the role of strategic urban planning , the analysis in this article suggests that municipalities can use several different modes of governance to act as change agents. The analysis illustrates that the involved municipalities during the case studies switched back and forth between four main modes of governance, as described in Table 4 below, depending on the situation and context. While Obersteg et al.  analysed CE initiatives in six European urban areas and found a general lack of public sector support for privateinitiatives, the conclusions form this article point in the opposite direction and seem more in line with studies from Swedish and Dutch cities . Local governments are in many countries heavily involved in planning and regulatory activities that overlap and affect the cir- cular economy. Most importantly, local governments in many countries are responsible  for handling waste. In Denmark, as in most of the neighbouring Scandinavian countries, this responsibility includes the development and implementation of policies, strategies and plans for the recycling, recovery and land ﬁlling of material ﬂows. This gives the local governments a natural stake in as well as potential in ﬂuence on closing the loop of urban material ﬂows. Table 4 illustrates how the municipalities in the two case studies used a combination of multiple modes of governance to increase the recirculation of textile waste and CDW. The two cases demon- strate the potential for closing urban material loops, thus contrib- uting to the development of the circular economy through governance through enabling especi ﬁcally in a partnership be- tween local governments, businesses and knowledge institutions. Such partnerships can be organised in multiple ways. The resultsfrom the project suggest that local governments can act as an important anchor for such initiatives using diverse modes of governance. Choosing the right mode or modes of governance is partly a choice made locally and partly a choice set by national legislation. Governing by authority is primarily decided by the national level of governance, whereas the three other modes of governance to a much larger extent depend on the design of the local level policy goals, resource allocation and ambitions. 6.3. Limitations and generalisation The implementation of circular economy policies varies signif- icantly across the globe. McDowall et al.  compared CE pol- icies between Europe and China and found the Chinese CE policies primarily relied on a broad, top edown-based approach, whereas European policies tended to be based on a bottom eup approach with a more narrow scope focussing on environmental issues but with an emphasis on waste and recycling. The analysis in this article supports this conclusion. When speci ﬁcally addressing local gov- ernments, the differences between regions in the world and countries become even larger as the level of autonomy at the local level of government varies signi ﬁcantly between different coun- tries. A low degree of autonomy at the local level of government will limit the possibilities of local governments to in ﬂuence the transition towards a circular economy. Issues such as local capa- bilities, knowledge, power and political will additionally in ﬂuence local governments possibilities for acting as a change agent . The distribution of responsibility between different layers of government is in Denmark to a large extent like in other Scandi- navian countries, where planning responsibilities and local au- tonomy are distributed to local governments . In other European countries, especially in the southern and easternparts of Europe, less local autonomy exists, and the ﬁndings of the case studies cannot be transferred directly. However, evidence from several studies indicates that local governments in different legal settings have a signi ﬁcant role to play despite national differences in terms of the magnitude of local autonomy from the national state. The ﬁndings from this study, for example, correspond with , who analysed the implementation of circular economy programmes in the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area and found that collaboration between multiple partners was a key driving force for change, despite the fact that the national state typically plays a more signi ﬁcant role in the Netherlands than inT.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 10 Denmark. In Denmark, the municipal ownership over utilities in the solid waste, wastewater and energy sectors is an important asset for creating change. Studies in industrial symbiosis ( Branson, 2016 ;Jacobsen, 2006 ) and the energy sector  illustrate how “governing by provision ”can function as a vehicle for change. The same was found in this study, where the municipal ownership of local waste companies in ﬂuenced collaboration, especially in the construction case, whereby construction materialswere stored at a facility owned by the waste company BOFA. Countries where this type of ownership relations does not exist may evidently not have such possibilities for governing by provision. 7. Conclusion The paper analysed how cities and local governments can contribute to developing a circular economy. The paper used a framework originally developed by Kern and Bulkeley  for studies on climate change mitigation initiatives and utilised this framework to understand circular economy initiatives. The paper analysed two case studies focussing on the recirculation of con- struction and demolition materials and waste textiles, and for both ﬂows found that changed practices can redirect the material ﬂows and support the transformation towards a circular economy. In both cases, the municipalities collaborated in partnerships with waste companies and knowledge institutions to identify waste streams and to explore pathways for closing material loops. Gov- erning by provision, where the municipalities collaborated with the municipally owned waste company, was in both cases found to function as an important driver for change. The cases indicated that municipalities can play a vital role in organising capacities among local stakeholders and that municipalities can function as an important change agent to support and facilitate the trans- formation towards a circular economy. Funding The research was funded by the Capital Region of Denmark, the Regional Council Development Funds. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements Thanks are given to master ’s students Alexander Sørensen Pazyj, Mads Holmgaard Meyer and Pernille Haagen Larsen, who devel- oped the material ﬂow analysis in the textile case.References Avdiushchenko, A., Zajaç, P., 2019. Circular economy indicators as a supporting tool for european regional development policies. Sustainability 11 . https:// doi.org/10.3390/su11113025 . Bernhardt, D., Ho, H., Zeller, K., Diakoulakis, S., 2018. Municipality-led Circular Economy Case Studies. The Circular Cities Project . Blomsma, F., Brennan, G., 2017. The emergence of circular economy: a new framing around prolonging resource productivity. J. Ind. Ecol. 21 , 603 e614. https:// doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12603 . Bocken, N.M.P., de Pauw, I., Bakker, C., van der Grinten, B., 2016. Product design and business model strategies for a circular economy. J. Industrial Product. Eng. 33 , 308 e320. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2016.1172124 . BOFA, 2018. Bornholm Viser Vej eUden Affald 2032 . Bolger, K., Doyon, A., 2019. Circular cities: exploring local government strategies to facilitate a circular economy. Eur. Plann. Stud. 27 , 2184 e2205. https:// doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2019.1642854 . Boulding, K., 1966. The economics of the coming Spaceship Earth. Environ. Qual. Growing Economy 3 e14. Essays from the Sixth RFF Forum . Branson, R., 2016. Re-constructing Kalundborg: the reality of bilateral symbiosis and other insights. J. Clean. Prod. 112, 4344 e4352. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jclepro.2015.07.069 . Braungart, M., McDonough, W., Bollinger, A., 2007. Cradle-to-cradle design: creating healthy emissions - a strategy for eco-effective product and system design. J. Clean. Prod. 15 , 1337 e1348. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jclepro.2006.08.003 . Brunner, P.H., Rechberger, H., 2016. Practical handbook of material ﬂow analysis. Practical Handbook Mater. Flow Anal. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02979426 . Bulkeley, H., Betsill, M.M., 2005. Rethinking sustainable cities: multilevel gover- nance and the “urban ”politics of climate change. Environ. Polit. 14 , 42 e63. https://doi.org/10.1080/0964401042000310178 . Bulkeley, H., Kern, K., 2006. Local government and the governing of climate change in Germany and the UK. Urban Stud. 43 , 2237 e2259. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/00420980600936491 . Cavicchi, B., Palmieri, S., Odaldi, M., 2017. The in ﬂuence of local governance: effects on the sustainability of bioenergy innovation. Sustainability 9 . https:// doi.org/10.3390/su9030406 . Christiansen, A., Skovbjerg, M., Bauer, B., Egebæk, K.R., 2019. Cirkulær Guide - Fællesnordisk Vejledning Til Udvikling Af “Den Cirkulære Kommune ”I Norden. Nordisk Ministerråd/PUB. TemaNord 2019:511 . Clift, Roland, Druckman, A., 2015. Taking stock of industrial ecology. In: Roland, Clift, Druckman, A. , Taking Stock of Industrial Ecology. Springer. https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20571-7 . Corfee-Morlot, J., Kamal-Chaoui, L., Donovan, M.G., Cochran, I., Robert, A., Teasdale, P.-J., 2009. Cities, climate change and multilevel governance. OECD Environ. Working Pap. 125. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/10/1/44242293.pdf . Cramer, J.M., 2020. Implementing the circular economy in the Amsterdam Metro- politan Area: the interplay between market actors mediated by transition brokers. Bus. Strat. Environ. 29 , 2857 e2870. https://doi.org/10.1002/ bse.2548 . Damsø, T., Kjær, T., Christensen, T.B., 2016. Local climate action plans in climate change mitigation - examining the case of Denmark. Energy Pol. 89, 74 e83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.11.013 . Danish Environmental Protection Agency, 2018. Kortlægning Af Tekstil ﬂowet I Dan- mark . Danish Environmental Protection Agency, Ministry for Environment and Food, Copenhagen, Denmark. Miljøprojekt nr. 2017 . Desrochers, P., 2002. Regional development and inter-industry recycling linkages: some historical perspectives. Enterpren. Reg. Dev. 14 , 49 e65.https://doi.org/ 10.1080/08985620110096627 . Di Maria, A., Eyckmans, J., Van Acker, K., 2018. Downcycling versus recycling of construction and demolition waste: combining LCA and LCC to support sus- tainable policy making. Waste Manag. 75, 3 e21.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.wasman.2018.01.028 . Ehnert, F., Kern, F., Borgstr €om, S., Gorissen, L., Maschmeyer, S., Egermann, M., 2018. Urban sustainability transitions in a context of multi-level governance: a comparison of four European states. Environ. Innovat. Soc. Trans. 26 (June 2017), 101 e116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2017.05.002 .Table 4 Modes of governance demonstrated in the two case studies. Construction case Textile case Self-governance Using the demolition fund to support selective demolition Not used Governing by provisionUsing the ownership to the local waste company BOFA as a storage facility for demolished construction materialsUsing relationships with the publicly owned waste company to explore the potential for the structure of a future collection scheme Governing by authorityUsing the waste planning and waste management authority Establishing a pilot collection scheme and implementing changes to the municipal waste management plan afterwards Governing through enablingCreating collaboration between local stakeholders in the construction and demolition sectorNot usedT.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 11 EMF, 2012. Towards the Circular Economy - Economic and Business Rationale for an Accelerated Transition . EMF, 2017. A New Textiles Economy: Redesigning Fashion ’s Future. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/ publications/A-New-Textiles-Economy_Full-Report_Updated_1-12-17.pdf% 0Ahttps://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/a-new-textiles-economy-redesigning-fashions-future . Erkman, S., 1997. Industrial ecology: an historical view. J. Clean. Prod. 5 , 1e10. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0959-652600003-6 . European Commission, 2015. Communication from the Commission to the Euro- pean Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Closing the Loop ean EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy . European Commission, 2017. EU Construction &Demolition Waste Management Protocol. Dublin, 22 June 2017  . Frosch, R.A., Gallopoulos, N.E., 1989. Strategies for manufacturing. Sci. Am. 261 , 144e152. https://doi.org/10.1038/scienti ﬁcamerican0989-144 . Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., Ulgiati, S., 2016. A review on circular economy: the ex- pected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and economic sys- tems. J. Clean. Prod. 114, 11 e32.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007 . Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwartzman, S., Scott, P., Martin, T., 1994. The New Production of Knowledge - the Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies. SAGE Publications Ltd . Gravagnuolo, A., Angrisano, M., Girard, L.F., 2019. Circular economy strategies in eight historic port cities: criteria and indicators towards a circular city assess- ment framework. Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11133512 . Jacobsen, N.B., 2006. The industrial symbiosis at Kalundborg, Denmark. J. Ind. Ecol. 10 , 239 e256. https://doi.org/10.1162/108819806775545411 . Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., Hekkert, M., 2017. Conceptualizing the circular economy: an analysis of 114 de ﬁnitions. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 127 , 221 e232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005 . Korhonen, J., Honkasalo, A., Sepp €al€a, J., 2018. Circular economy: the concept and its limitations. Ecol. Econ. 143, 37 e46. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.ecolecon.2017.06.041 . Marin, J., De Meulder, B., 2018. Interpreting circularity. Circular city representations concealing transition drivers. Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.3390/ su10051310 . McDowall, W., Geng, Y., Huang, B., Bartekov /C19a, E., Bleischwitz, R., Türkeli, S., Kemp, R., Dom /C19enech, T., 2017. Circular economy policies in China and Europe. J. Ind. Ecol. 21 , 651 e661. https://doi.org/10. 1111/jiec.12597 . Meadows, D.H., 1972. In: Meadows, D.H. , The Limits to Growth : a Report for the Club of Rome ’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind, p. 8 print. Obersteg, A., Arlati, A., Acke, A., Berruti, G., Czapiewski, K., Da ˛browski, M., Heurkens, E., Mezei, C., Palestino, M.F., Varjú, V., W /C19ojcik, M., Knieling, J., 2019.Urban regions shifting to circular economy: understanding challenges for new ways of governance. Urban Plan. 4 , 19 e31.https://doi.org/10.17645/ up.v4i3.2158 . Palm, J., S €odergren, K., Bocken, N., 2019. The role of cities in the sharing economy: exploring modes of governance in urban sharing practices. Energies 12 . https://doi.org/10.3390/en12244737 . Petit-Boix, A., Leipold, S., 2018. Circular economy in cities: reviewing how envi- ronmental research aligns with local practices. J. Clean. Prod. 195, 1270 e1281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.05.281 . Prendeville, S., Cherim, E., Bocken, N., 2018. Circular cities: mapping six cities in transition. Environ. Innovat. Soc. Trans. 26 , 171 e194. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2017.03.002 . S ̌ajn, N., 2019. Environmental impact of the textile and clothing industry. What Consumers Need to Know. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/ BRIE/2019/633143/EPRS_BRI633143_EN.pdf . Sandin, G., Peters, G.M., 2018. Environmental impact of textile reuse and recycling e a review. J. Clean. Prod. 184, 353 e365. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jclepro.2018.02.266 . Silva, R.V., de Brito, J., Dhir, R.K., 2017. Availability and processing of recycled ag- gregates within the construction and demolition supply chain: a review. J. Clean. Prod. 143, 598 e614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.070 . Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockstr €om, J., Cornell, S.E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E.M., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S.R., De Vries, W., De Wit, C.A., Folke, C., Gerten, D.,Heinke, J., Mace, G.M., Persson, L.M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., S €orlin, S., 2015. Planetary boundaries: guiding human development on a changing planet. Science 347 . https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259855 . UNDESA, 2018. World Urbanization Prospects 2018: Highlights . UNEP, 2019. Global environmental Outlook eGEO6, healthy planet, healthy people. In: Global Environment Outlook eGEO-6: Healthy Planet, Healthy People. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108627146.001 . Wang, N., Lee, J.C.K., Zhang, J., Chen, H., Li, H., 2018. Evaluation of Urban circular economy development: an empirical research of 40 cities in China. J. Clean. Prod. 180, 876 e887. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.089 . Watson, David, Kiørboe, Nikola, Kjær, Birgitte, Lindblad, Bryn, Dammand, Kristian, Nielsen, R., 2014. Mindre affald og mere genanvendelse i tekstilbranchen Id /C19eer fra aktørerne på tekstilområdet  . WBCSD, 2017. CEO Guide to the Circular Economy . Wittmayer, J.M., Sch €apke, N., van Steenbergen, F., Omann, I., 2014. Making sense of sustainability transitions locally: how action research contributes to addressing societal challenges. Crit. Pol. Stud. 8 , 465 e485. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 19460171.2014.957336 . Zvolska, L., Lehner, M., Voytenko Palgan, Y., Mont, O., Plepys, A., 2019. Urban sharing in smart cities: the cases of Berlin and London. Local Environ. 24 , 628 e645. https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2018.1463978 .T.B. Christensen Journal of Cleaner Production 305  127058 12 

