Procedia  CIRP 90  49–54  Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect   Procedia  CIRP   journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/procir   Introduction  of the circular  economy  to expanded  polystyrene   household  waste:  A case  study  from  an Ecuadorian  plastic   manufacturer   J. Hidalgo-Crespo  a , c , F.X. Jervis  b , C.M. Moreira  b , M. Soto c , J.L. Amaya  b , ∗ a Universidad  de Guayaquil,  Facultad de Ingeniería  Industrial,  Av. Dr. Jiménez Lince y Av. Juan Tanca Marengo,  090501 Guayaquil,  Ecuador  b ESPOL Polytechnic  University,  Escuela Superior Politécnica  del Litoral, ESPOL, Facultad de Ingeniería  Mecánica  y Ciencias de la Producción,  Campus  Gustavo Galindo Km. 30.5 Vía Perimetral,  P.O. Box 09-01-5863,  Guayaquil,  Ecuador  c Universidade  da Coruña, Facultade  de Ciencias, Rúa da Fraga 10, 15008 A Coruña, Galiza, España  a r t i c l e i n f o  Keywords:   Recycling   Expanded  polystyrene   Plastic manufacturing   Circular economy  a b s t r a c t  Transition  towards  a more sustainable  society is a complex  task. The depletion  of natural resources  and  waste generation  cannot be sustained  indeﬁnitely,  i.e. as waste increases,  local landﬁlls  keep growing  and  land availability  reduces.  The introduction  of circular economy  in effective  household  solid waste manage-   ment practices  should be considered  especially  for third world countries,  such as Ecuador.  In this context,   plastic recycling  is an important  step, particularly  the case of expanded  polystyrene  containers  that cur-  rently are single-use  only and later end up in local landﬁlls.  This paper presents  a methodology  for recy-  cling Expanded  Polystyrene  by means of a case study from an Ecuadorian  Plastic Manufacturer.  First, the  manufacture  of resin from post-consume  EPS containers  was demonstrated  possible  by the manufacturer.   Second,  results show that using 30% of post-consume  resin in the mix produce  satisfactory  laboratory   results and operational  recycled  containers.   ©2 0 2 0 The Author.  Published  by Elsevier  B.V.  This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND  license.    1. Introduction   As the Ecuadorian  society  grows in population  and economy,   its needs increases,  thus rising waste generation.  An increasingly   stream  of wastage  being dispose  in landﬁlls  has quickly  become   a signiﬁcant  problem  for the country  . Accord-   ing to the National  Institute  of Statistics  and Censuses   in  2016, almost 13 thousand  tons of solid waste were collected  daily,  of which 90.3% were collected  in an unsorted  manner  and 9.7%  in a sorted manner  ( National  Institute  of Statistics  and Censuses,   Solid Residues  Management,  2016 ). Also, the increasing  extraction   of natural  resources  to support  economic  growth  has made an im-  pact on the environmental  and social sustainability  of the supply  networks  . The scarcity  of  resources  will increase  in the future and the ability to recover  and  ∗Corresponding  author at: ESPOL Polytechnic  University,  Escuela Superior   Politécnica  del Litoral, ESPOL, Facultad de Ingeniería  Mecánica  y Ciencias de la Pro-  ducción, Campus Gustavo Galindo Km. 30.5 Vía Perimetral,  P.O. Box 09-01-5863,   Guayaquil,  Ecuador.  E-mail address: jorge-luis.amaya@espol.edu.ec  . manage  these resources  will become  essential  for a sustainable  lo-  cal economy  .  In previous  research  , the authors  classi-  ﬁed and measured  the amounts  of waste produced  per household   in the city of Guayaquil.  A total of 0.61 kg is generated  per person   daily, from which almost 76% is organic,  8% plastic,  6% paper and  cardboard,  6% for glass and dust and 4% of metal and others. Con-  sidering  a total of 2.291 million  people for the city in the year 2010  ( National  Institute  of Statistics  and Censuses,  Solid Residues  Man-  agement,  2010 ), according  to the last Census  performed  by INEC,  almost 1780 tons of solid waste is generated  every day. This rep-  resents  approximately  41% of the total waste collected  by the mu-  nicipality.   Plastic waste has been put under scrutiny;  due to, its genera-   tion has been constantly  increasing  over the last decades.  Nowa-  days, the production  of plastic reached  about 350 million  tons per  year worldwide  . There is growing   evidence  that the current  use and disposal  of plastic leads to sub-  stantial  pollution  of terrestrial  and aquatic  ecosystems,  having a  tremendous  effect on various  aspects  including  wildlife,  through   diverse  routes. These impacts  are especially  noticeable  for single-  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2020.01.089   2212-8271/© 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.     50 J. Hidalgo-Crespo,  F.X. Jervis and C.M. Moreira et al. / Procedia CIRP 90  49–54  use plastics  , such  as expanded  polystyrene   which represents  6.26% of all the  plastic waste in the country.   EPS is an excellent  material  for packaging  and construction,  be-  cause of its light weight,  rigidity,  highly desirables  insulation  prop-  erties and shock resistance.  On the other hand, polystyrene  is very  stable and extremely  hard to degrade  in the environment  after dis-  posal . One study on life cycle analysis  concludes   that to produce  1.716 g of EPS, 87.47 mg of CO 2 are released  in the  atmosphere  .  The city hall of Guayaquil,  aims to regulate  the manufacture,   trade , distribution  and delivery  of single-use  plastics.   Within  this ordinance,  the manufacturers  of single-use  EPS items  must change  the formula  in their process,  to a new formula  or  product  agreeing  with any of the following  options:  1) products  are  100% biodegradable,  2) 70% of total product  mass comes from recy-  cled materials  and 3) using other reusable  materials  in the lapse of  30 months  ( Ecuador.  Autonomous  Decentralized  Government  Mu-  nicipality  of Guayaquil,  2018 ). In concordance  with the local ordi-  nance are international  regulations  that the country  needs to ac-  complish.  For example,  in July 2019, the Associated  States of the  Paciﬁc Alliance,  from which Ecuador  is a new member,  referred  to  the importance  of developing  new policies  to promote  the integral   management  of waste and reducing  the production  of single-use   plastics  ( Ecuador.  Autonomous  Decentralized  Government  Munici-   pality of Guayaquil,  2019 ).  Importantly,  Guayaquil  is the city with highest  plastic manufac-   turing, according  to the Ecuadorian  Plastic Associantion  ,   64% of the 600 companies  nationwide  are localted  in this impor-  tant and this single industry  generates  more than 19,0 0 0 direct  and 120,0 0 0 indirect  jobs . Furthermore,  nation-   wide EPS container  manufacturers  do not comply  with any of the  three choices  the city hall ordinance  has set as acceptable.  This is  the main reason why EPS item producer  ´s opinion  is that the local  ordinance  could harm the industry  in its production  processes  and  risk the stability  of many workers.   Thus, the following  question  arises: what strategy  should plastic  manufacturing  companies  follow to survive  in this new local eco-  friendly  environment?   One contributing  solution  is shifting  from a linear economy  to  a circular  economy  in single-use  items production  by means of  reusing  and recycling  expanded  polystyrene  products.  Manufactur-   ers already  reuse their scrap as part of their production  process   , so if they add post-consume  resin as raw ma-  terial, they could achieve  the 70% recycled  material  objective  set by  the municipality.   This study focuses  in giving feasible  options  to the single-use   plastic manufacturers  to redesign  their products,  so they can in-  crease the use of recycled    material;  applying  the  concept  of circular  economy  to strengthen  their competitiveness   and supporting  resource  sustainability.   For this purpose,  the linear typical economy  and circular  econ-  omy proposal  set by the authors  are presented  in the methodology   . The process  description  to obtain the recycled  resin  from post-consume  containers  effectuated  by the manufacturer  is  then presented.  Production  of new recycled  containers  and labo-  ratory test values are presented  in the results . Finally,   conclusions  and discussion  are presented  in Sectons  4 and 5 .  2. Methodology   The prevailing  linear economic  system  in local plastic manufac-   turers accumulates  waste, while depleting  natural  resources.  Limi-  tations  of natural  resources  and a growing  world population  have  set the idea of a circular  economy  in the focus of research,  industry   and politics  in recent years . Fig. 1. Linear economy  EPS cycle.  2.1. Linear economy  EPS production  cycle  Plastic is present  everywhere,  every day; either as a raw ma-  terial or as ﬁnished  product.  As a result, plastic is a continuous   growing  industry.  Indeed,  its sales has reﬂected  a steady growth  of  about 9% in the period from 2014 to 2018 .  This industry  has made rapid progress,  since plastic is an element   used in different  sectors.  In addition  to being the main raw mate-  rial, it is a product  on which many other processes  depend.  It is  estimated  that between  70 to 80% of necessary  plastic is supplied   by local industries  , only importing  highly spe-  cialized  plastic products  or in large volumes.  Nevertheless,  most  residues  end up in landﬁlls,  culminating  a linear economy  and af-  fecting  the environment.  Fig. 1 shows the current  linear economy   to manufacture  EPS products  in the country.  Next, each of the steps  presented  in the scheme  of EPS lineal economy  cycle will be ex-  plained  in detail.  2.1.1. Raw material   According  to ASEPLAS,  the import  of plastic resins reached  381  thousand  tons in 2017 . Plastic companies  acquire   almost all its raw material  from abroad,  because  there is no local  petrochemical  industry  that can produce  in large volumes  to meet  the demand  of national  industries.  Futrthermore,  plastic companies   in Ecuador  make no-effort  s to obt ain raw materials  from recycling   of EPS waste and don ´t attempt  to ﬁnd alternative  materials,  given  that EPS is very ingrained  in the culture  of society.   2.1.2. EPS product  manufacture  and Scrap reuse/reprocess   In an attempt,  to reduce the use of “virgin resin” residues  from  the manufacturing  process  are collected    for reuse. For this  purpose,  the raw material  in the form of a mix of “virgin” and   “scrap” resin  pellets,  enters the manufacture  process  to obtain ex-  panded  polystyrene  products,  such as: dishes,  plates, drink con-  tainers.  Also, residues  from this process  are collected  in the form  of scrap for later treatment  and reuse. The latter tries to avoid  residues  within the boundaries  of the company.   J. Hidalgo-Crespo,  F.X. Jervis and C.M. Moreira et al. / Procedia CIRP 90  49–54 51  Fig. 2. Proposed  circular economy  cycle  2.1.3. Distribution   The EPS products  are transported  to intermediary  businesses   such as: fast food companies,  grocery  stores, restaurants,  resellers   and many others that will deliver  the products  to the ﬁnal users.  2.1.4. Final use  The ﬁnal user for this cycle is the household  owner that ac-  quires these products  and then throws  it away as waste, usually   without  sorting  it ﬁrst as written  in the previous  section.   2.1.5. Landﬁll   According  to the Ministry  of Environment  , nowadays  49%  of the municipalities  dispose  of their waste in landﬁlls  and emerg-   ing cells. The rest still dispose  the ﬁnal waste in open-air  dumps,   which generates  direct effects on the soil, landscape,  air, health  and water. EPS waste takes as much as 500 years to degrade  with-  out oxygen,  but the expiration  time of landﬁlls  is not as long.  2.2. Proposed  circular  economy  EPS production  cycle  In a circular  economy,  resources  are kept in use for as long  as possible,  extracting  the maximum  value from them whilst in  use, then recovering  and regenerating  products  and materials  at  the end of each service  life . The circular  economy   concept  provides  a key opportunity  to address  the challenge  of re-  source scarcity  for both policy makers  and industries.  Companies   are urged to play their part and integrate  circular  economy  in their  business  .  Nowadays,  single-use  expanded  polystyrene  manufacturing   companies  in Ecuador  don ´t recycle  post-consumption  plastic for  their production  process.  In fact, they reprocess  the scrap mate-  rial left from the molding  and cutting  of the plastic products  and  other forms to process  post-industrial  resin, applying  the reuse of  the 3R ´s of circular  economy  inside the boundaries  of the company.   After, the post-industrial  and virgin resin are mixed to create new  EPS products.  However,  this doesn ´t mean that less EPS waste is  being buried in local landﬁlls.  As shown in the previous  section,  almost 92% of all waste is buried and between  6 to 8% is recycled.   Fig. 2 shows the proposed  circular  economy  model for EPS waste  in dashed  red lines. The landﬁll  is removed  in this model by at-  tempting  to reprocess  the post-consume  waste.  2.2.1. Individual  collection   In the current  way to recycle  waste, household  owners  leave  their waste bags outside  their homes in the set garbage  truck  schedule.  Afterwards,  individual  collectors  check the waste and  separate  all that they think has value. In order to recycle  EPS  waste, ﬁrst household  owners  must be conscientized  on the sep-  aration  of their residues  inside their homes.   Secondly,  monetary  value must be given to EPS residues  by  waste recycle  companies  and/or resellers  to make individual  col-  lectors also take that type of waste.  2.2.2. EPS waste resellers   The waste is after taken for storage  and reselling.  Such busi-  nesses already  exist and operate  in the city, so EPS waste must be  added to their structure.   2.2.3. Waste reprocesses   The collected  EPS must be retransformed  in resin pellets to be  used in the manufacture  of new products.  This process  may be  done by the plastic manufacturer  or by a third party if it is eco-  nomically  attractive.  Further  information  of this process  can be  seen in Section  3.1 .  3. Results   In order to achieve  this proposed  circular  economy  scenario,   problems  and constraints  must be alleviated  ﬁrst. One of them  is precise  data on the possibility  of obtaining  high quality  EPS  products  using recycled  post-consume  products  combined  with the  used “scrap” and  “virgin” resin  for the manufacturing  process.  In  this context,  from June to August  2019, the authors  collaborated   52 J. Hidalgo-Crespo,  F.X. Jervis and C.M. Moreira et al. / Procedia CIRP 90  49–54  Fig. 3. Post-Consume  EPS resin transformation  process  with a local plastic manufacturer  in order to formalize  the recy-  cling of single-use  expanded  polystyrene  post-consume  containers.   The goal was to obtain at least 100 kg of the post-consume  recy-  cled EPS.  For this purpose,  one hundred  volunteer  students  from two lo-  cal universities  participated  in the collection  process,  and a total  amount  of 230 kg was collected.  After collection,  the manufacturer   continued  with the protocol  agreed for the post-consume  recycling   process  at their quarters.  The experiment  formalization  includes  all  the process  starting  from the arrival of post-consume  EPS waste  where the authors  helped  with the collection  through  the produc-   tion of recycled  resin and subsequent  elaboration  of new EPS con-  tainers.   3.1. Manufacturing  of waste recycle resin pellets  Fig. 3 shows the recycling  process  of the post-consume  plas-  tic waste until it becomes  resin pellets done by the manufactur-   ing company.  The ﬁrst 4 steps were done in an artisanal  manner   by just one operator.  It started  with the 1. prewashing  of all waste  using a hose with pressurized  water to remove  any remains  of or-  ganic matter impregnated  to the waste. Continued  with the 2. se-  lection/segregation  of the waste, where the operator  proceeded  to  divide the waste between  the colors of presentation  and excluding   any material  that could not continue  the process.   After came the 3. washing  in a washing-machine  where liquid  detergent,  degreaser  and liquid chlorine  were added and after 4.  drying at medium  temperature.  This process  lasted around  45 min    per cycle and even though  the  maximum  capacity  of the washing-machine  and dryer is 20 kg,  only 600 g approximately  could be introduced  inside the machines   during each batch, because  of the high volume    of  the waste. The washing  and drying of enough  material  took ap-  proximately  2 weeks to obtain almost 14 kg of dry waste. After, it  Fig. 4. Manufacturing  of post-consume  extruded  sheet  was transported  to the reprocess  area where the company  trans-  forms the scrap into resin as previously  stated. There, the waste  followed  three more steps: 5. grinding,  6. extrusion  and 7. pelletiz-   ing where waste was crushed  into small fragments  and granules  in  the grinder,  then passed to the extruder  through  heat and pressure   until it dissolved  and ﬁnally ﬂew out of a small outlet and solid-  iﬁed into a continuous  thin line. The extruded  plastic stream  was  then cut into pellets by a pellet cutter with a rotation  knife and  cooled in a water bath at room temperature.   3.2. Manufacturing  of post-consume  new EPS containers   Before the test, the company  used 70% of virgin resin and 30%  of scrap reprocessed/reused  resin for their process.  Depending  on  the type of container  built, they programmed  the sheet extrusion   machine  for certain  thickness  of the sheet.  For the experiment,  the manufacturer  decided  to combine  all  three types of resin before entering  the EPS sheet extrusion  line  using the following  mix as shown in Fig. 4:  • 40% Virgin Resin   • 30% Scrap Reprocess  Resin/Reuse    • 30% Recycled  Post-Consume  Resin   The machine  was already  in operation  with a previous  batch  when they entered  the mix and set to produce  2.2 mm plates. So,  the ﬁrst two rolls  were marked  as transition,  since they  contained  the previous  and new mix and the following  two were  marked  as post-consume.   Total weight  of transition  rolls were 43.6 kg and the weight   of the post-consume  rolls were 21.6 kg, giving a ﬁnal weight  of  65.2 kg. The transition  roll occurred  when shifting  from the usual  mix to the new proposed  mix, therefore  there were 20.2 kg of ex-  tra EPS sheet. After this, the four rolls were separated  and storage   for further  use in a next session,  given that all thermo  forming   machines  were busy at the time of the experiment,  as shown in  Fig. 4 .  One week after the sheet rolls of expanded  polystyrene  were  made, the manufacturer  decided  to make 5 in. x 5 in. foam food  containers  as the trial run of the new process  using the recycling   resin. They set the post-consume  rolls in the machine  and started   running  it. Some post-consume  containers  were taken away for  laboratory  analysis  with other previous  ones in order to compare   properties.   J. Hidalgo-Crespo,  F.X. Jervis and C.M. Moreira et al. / Procedia CIRP 90  49–54 53  Table 1  Laboratory  report for characteristics  of normal, transition  and post-consume  re-  cycled containers.   Container  description  Average weight  Average resistance    A. Normal 5.00 10.12  B. Transition  4.80 7.54  C. Post-consume  recycled 4.70 9.26  3.3. Laboratory  analysis  tests  Based on the previous  sections,  ﬁve samples  of each of the  three type of ﬁnal products  were collected  for posterior  analysis:   A Regular  mix EPS containers.   B Reformulated  mix EPS containers  transition  roll.  C Reformulated  mix EPS containers  post-consume  roll.  All samples  were weighed,  and their resistance  measured  after  24 hours. Average  values are shown in Table 1 . We consider  the A  containers  as the base sample.  The presence  of recycled  materials   seems to make the mixture  more rigid  in the tran-  sition sample.  However,  the analysis  for the transition  was made  only 2 hours after production,  in a previous  day, so that may be  the reason for the difference.   Also, microbiological  analysis  is necessary  for these products   to ensure quality  through  the application  of procedures  to test  the presence  of microorganisms  and compare  them to standard-   ized limits . This becomes  very important  in  the context  of a circular  economy,  since microorganisms  present  in  food industry  as a microﬂora  may penetrate  EPS waste food con-  tainers.  The reprocess  of new recycled  resin pellets could lead to  undesirable  effects on public health.   Nonetheless,  laboratory  analysis  effectuated  by the manufac-   turer showed  no presence  of microorganisms  in any of the sam-  ples. This can be explained  because  the extrusion  process  occurs  at a temperature  higher than 200 °C for the recycled  resin manu-  facture  and almost 120 °C for the roll production.  Both processes   add almost 18 min of total time and at these temperatures,  no mi-  croorganisms  can survive.   Finally,  containers  or other expanded  polystyrene  elements  can  release  particles  that can be absorbed  by food. The certiﬁcation   of these products  is done by the migration  test. Plastic materials   and objects  should not yield their components  to food products  in  quantities  exceeding  10 mg/dm  2 or 60 mg/kg (limit of Global Mi-  gration  by Ecuadorian  Technical  Standard  NTE INEN-EN  1186-1).   For this experiment,  migration  test results,  although  being a lit-  tle higher for recycled  containers,  still showed  much lower levels  than the limits set by the Ecuadorian  Technical  Standard  .  4. Conclusions  and ﬁnal remarks   Based on the literature  and the country  ´s actual recycle  scheme;   a circular  economy  model scenario  has been proposed.  Unarguably,   the beneﬁts  derived  from the implementation  of circular  economy   are due to the reduction  in the consumption  of natural  resources.   However,  the economic  and environmental  beneﬁts  are not self- evident  and need to be proven  by an in-depth  analysis  such as life  cycle assessment  of the current  and proposed  scenarios.   The primary  aim of this research  was to contribute  to the pri-  vate single-use  plastic industry  to redesign  their products  using  recycled  materials.  To attain this purpose,  it was made clear that  EPS waste reprocess  to form new resin pellets is possible  and that  mixing  with virgin and reused pellets can create high quality  new  products.   There is a great plastic waste problem,  and it is an issue that  must be considered.  Most post-consume  EPS containers  are dis-  carded in landﬁlls  and pollute  the environment.  The rates of waste  recovery  in Ecuador  are very low, so it is of vital importance  for  policy making  institutions  to increase  the knowledge  of circular   economy  and help them asses the feasibility  of recycling  EPS and  develop  a supportive  system  that facilitates  and encourages  recy-  cling activities  among  recyclable  waste collectors’  associations.   5. Discussion  and future research   The plastic companies  in the country  reuse/reprocess  the scrap  left from the production  lines. This prevents  the scrap to end-up   in landﬁlls  and damage  environment.  Nevertheless,  the reprocess   means more energy  is needed  to recover  material  through  post-  industrial  pellets.  Thus, more analysis  is needed  to evaluate  the to-  tal damage  done to the environment  between  the two choices  by  life cycle assessment,  which is a systematic  analysis  of the envi-  ronmental  impact  of products  during their entire life cycle (pro-  duction,  use and disposal  phases).   This ﬁrst attempt  to demonstrate  the mechanical  recyclability   of EPS single use products,  in Ecuador,  proves the potential  for the  development  of a circular  economy  around  this type of waste ma-  terial. However,  more trials are need to be set in place to diminish   the difference  in values for weight  and resistance.  In practice,  un-  fortunately,  remelting  and forming  new post-consume  resin often  degrades  the properties  of the recycled  items products.  Thus, the  amount  of virgin resin shall increase  to keep the quality  of the ﬁ-  nal product  and some waste will always be created.   Also, in order to develop  a circular  economy  around  domes-   tic waste, people need to participate  in the process  of separa-   tion. Studies  indicate  that when made available  people will use  the colored  recycle  bins. Government  intervention  is important,   to surveillance  and reinforcement  of already  made policies,  for  managing  possible  recycling  items. Also, reprocess  companies  must  have the technology  to decontaminate  the polymers  before melting   and resell high quality  recycled  plastic raw material  to the manu-  facturers.   Acknowledgements   The authors  would like to thank Marco Roche, Eng.; Technical   Manager  of Plásticos  del Litoral S.A.   for its involvement   and compromise  in this project.  This paper is supported  by the  National  Secretary  of Superior  Education,  Science,  Technology  and  Innovation    –I N E D I T A  program,  project  “Characteriza-   tion of urban household  waste in Guayaquil  for the classiﬁcation  of  plastic and organic  waste and reuse in local industry”.   Table 2  Migration  test results.  Parameter  Results Normal EPS container   Results Recycled  EPS container    Global Migration  Test   4.3 4.6  Global migration  test  0.8 1.6  Global Migration  Test   0.5 1.2  Global Migration  Test   1.0 1.0  54 J. Hidalgo-Crespo,  F.X. Jervis and C.M. Moreira et al. / Procedia CIRP 90  49–54  References   Barrera Castro, G., Ocampo Carmona,  L., Olaya Florez, J., “Production  and characteri-   zation of the mechanical  and thermal properties  of expanded  polystyrene  with  recycled material,” Ing.  Univ., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 177-194.   Biganzoli,  L. , Rigamonti,  L. , Grosso, M. ,2 0 1 8 . Intermediate  bulk containers  re-use in  the circular economy:  an LCA evaluation.  Procedia  CIRP 69, 827–832  .  Cabello, R.G., 2014. Impact of China’s Economic  Growth on Ecuadorian  Plas-  tic Resins Purchase  Levels from 2007 to 2011. Universidad  de especiali-   dades espiritu santo, facultad de economia  y ciencias empresariales  Retrieved   from http://repositorio.uees.edu.ec/bitstream/123456789/708/1/Paper%20Final%   20-%20Rafael%20Cabello%20G.pdf  .  Ecuador. Autonomous  Decentralized  Government  Municipality  of Guayaquil  .  Ordinance  to regulate the manufacture,  trade of any type, distribution   and delivery of single-use  plastic products  and speciﬁcally  of plastic sor-  bets, containers,  tubs, cutlery, glasses, plastic and foam cups and plas-  tic t-shirt covers, including  oxobiodegradable,  in the canton Guayaquil.   Retrieved  from https://guayaquil.gob.ec/Gacetas/Periodo%202014-2019/Gaceta%   2091.pdf#search=ordinance%20para%20regular%20la%20fabricaci%C3%B3n   Koumparou,  D. , 2017. Circular economy  and social sustainability.  In: Proceedings  of  Solid Waste Management  & its Contribution  to Circular Economy  .  Heidbreder,  L.M. , Bablok, I. , 2019. S. Drews, C. Menzel. Tackling the plastic problem:   a review on perceptions,  behaviours,  and interventions.  Sci. Total Environ. 668,  1077–1093  .  Hidalgo, J., Amaya, J.L., Jervis, F., Moreira, C., 2019. Inﬂuence  of socio-economic   factors on household  solid waste  generation  of the city of guayaquil,   ecuador. In: Paper presented  at the Proceedings  of the LACCEI International   Multi-Conference  for Engineering,  Education  and Technology  doi: 10.18687/   LACCEI2019.1.1.24  , 2019-July.   Ho, B.T. , Roberts, T.K. , Lucas, S. , 2018. An overview  on biodegradation  of polystyrene   and modiﬁed  polystyrene:  the microbial  approach.  Crit. Rev. Biotechnol.  38 ,  308–320  .  Leaders Magazine.  The plastics industry moves at the pace of some 600  companies  . Retrieved  from https://www.revistalideres.ec/lideres/   industria-plastico-inversion-innovacion-ritmo.html   Leejarkpai,  T , Mungcharoen,  T , Suwanmanee,  U , 2016. Comparative  assessment  of  global warming  impact and eco-eﬃciency  of PS ,  PET (polyethylene   terephthalate)  and PLA  boxes. J. Clean. Prod. 125, 95–107 .  Mativenga,  P.T , Al Amin, M.S. , Agwa-Ejon,  J. , Mbohwa,  C. , 2017. Composites  in a cir-  cular economy:  a study of united Kingdom  and South Africa. Procedia  CIRP 61,  691–696  . Mirzaei, N. , Bahrami,  A.R. , Rahimi, E. , Saedi, B. , Mirlohi, M. , Safaei, H.G. , 2016. Impor-  tance of microbial  analysis of Cling ﬁlm in food packaging  industry.  Sch. Acad.  J. Biosci. 4 , 661 .  National Institute of Statistics  and Censuses,  Census of Housing and Population   . Retrieved  from http://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/wpcontent/descargas/   Libros/Memorias/memorias  _ censo _ 2010.pdf   National Institute of Statistics  and Censuses,  Solid Residues  Management.   . Solid Residues  Management:  Statistical  of economic  environmen-   tal information  in autonomous  municpal  descentralized  governments,   Ecuador. Retrieved  from https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/documentos/   web-inec/Encuestas  _ Ambientales/Gestion  _ Integral _ de _ Residuos  _ Solidos/2016/   Documento%20tecnico%20Residuos%20solidos%202016%20F.pdf   PlasticsEurope,  2018. Plastics - the facts 2018: an analysis of European  plastics pro-  duction, demand and waste data. Retrieved  from https://www.plasticseurope.   org/download  _ ﬁle/force/2387/319  .  Sitepu, M.H. , McKay, A. , Holt, R.J. ,2 0 1 6 . Towards a framework  for sustainable  de-  velopment  planning  in the Indonesian  natural rubber industry supply network.   Procedia  CIRP 48, 164–169 .  Spierling,  S. , Rottger, C. , Venkatachalam,  V. , Mudersback,  M. , Endres, C.H.J. , 2018.  Bio-based  plastics: A building block for the circular economy?  Procedia  CIRP  69, 573–578  .  Stewart, R. , Niero, M. , Murdock,  K. , Olsen, S.I. , 2018. Exploring  the implementation   of a circular economy  strategy:  the case of a closed-loop  supply o f aluninum   beverage  cans. Procedia  CIRP 69, 810–815 .  Tan, R.B.H. , Khoo, H.H. , 2005. Life cycle assessment  of EPS and CPB inserts: design  considerations  and end of life scenarios.  J. Environ. Manag. 74 , 195–205  .  Tekler, Z.D. , Low, R. , Chung, S.Y. , Choong, L.J.S. , Blessing,  L. , 2019. A waste manage-   ment behavioural  framework  of Singapore  ´s food manufacturing  industry using  factor analysis. Procedia  CIRP 80, 578–583  .  The Paciﬁc Alliance reaﬃrms  its commitment  to integration,  sustainable  de-  velopment  and free trade . Retrieved  from: https://alianzapaciﬁco.   net/la- alianza- del- paciﬁco-  reaﬁrma-  su- compromiso-  con- la- integracion-  el-  desarrollo-  sostenible-  y- el- libre- comercio/   Vea, E.B. , Romeo, D. , Thomsen,  M. , 2018. Biowaste  valorisation  in a future circular  bioeconomy.  Procedia  CIRP 69, 591–596  .  Xanthos,  D. , Walker, T.R. , 2017. International  policies to reduce plastic marine pollu-  tion from single-use  plastics :  a review. Mar. Pol-  lut. Bull. 118 , 17–26 Issues .  

