Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Bioresource Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biortech Review Resource recovery and circular economy from organic solid waste using aerobic and anaerobic digestion technologies Steven Wainainab, Mukesh Kumar Awasthia,b,⁎, Surendra Sarsaiyaf, Hongyu Chend, Ekta Singhc, Aman Kumarc, B. Ravindrane, Sanjeev Kumar Awasthia, Tao Liua, Yumin Duana, Sunil Kumarc, Zengqiang Zhanga, Mohammad J. Taherzadehb aCollege of Natural Resources and Environment, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi Province 712100, PR China bSwedish Centre for Resource Recovery, University of Borås, 50190 Borås, Sweden cCSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nehru Marg, Nagpur 440 020, Maharashtra, India dInstitute of Biology, Freie Universität Berlin Altensteinstr. 6, 14195 Berlin, Germany eDepartment of Environmental Energy and Engineering, Kyonggi University Youngtong-Gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-Do 16227, South Korea fKey Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology and Joint International Research Laboratory of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, Guizhou, PR China ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Resource recoveryOrganic solid wasteCircular economyAnaerobic digestionCompostingABSTRACT With the inevitable rise in human population, resource recovery from waste stream is becoming important for a sustainable economy, conservation of the ecosystem as well as for reducing the dependence on the ﬁnite natural resources. In this regard, a bio-based circular economy considers organic wastes and residues as potential re- sources that can be utilized to supply chemicals, nutrients, and fuels needed by mankind. This review explored the role of aerobic and anaerobic digestion technologies for the advancement of a bio-based circular society. Thedeveloped routes within the anaerobic digestion domain, such as the production of biogas and other high-valuechemicals  were discussed. The potential to recover important nutrients, such as nitrogen through composting, was also addressed. An emphasis was made on the innovative models for improved eco- nomics and process performance, which include co-digestion of various organic solid wastes, recovery of mul-tiple bio-products, and integrated bioprocesses. 1. Introduction Disposal of organic solid waste  has become one of the hot topics in research. Simultaneously, the collection and recycling of OSW is presently principal environmental concerns in both urban and countryside areas in numerous industrial and developing countries . With the rapid development of modern society and the continuously rising population all over the world, the generation ofOSW is projected to be signi ﬁcantly increased annually. Statistically, 2.01 billion tons of municipal wastes were produced worldwide and by2050, approximately 3.4 billion tons of municipal wastes will be emerged annually if the current trend continues . Furthermore, improper waste management is not only pernicious tohuman beings and local environment, but also exacerbates the climate change and causes the sanitation system thus forcing nations and governments to invest more ﬁnancial and material resources for its remediation. Consequently, ideal technologies to OSW management isnot only conducive to environmental protection and sustainable de-velopment but also critical to forge a circular economy ( Felix et al., 2019 ). In a circular economy, recycling and reuse is the major principle for designing and optimization of products. As nations and authorities allover the world gradually embracing the concept of circular economy and attempting to bring it in practice, disposing wastes with an ad- vanced and sustainable way could promote e ﬃcient economic growth with reduced environmental impacts at the same time ( Pooja et al., 2018; González-García et al., 2019 ). This concept not only creates more job opportunities but also able to converts waste into treasure andtransforms it to a new clean energy and material sources through classiﬁed management and recycling. Governments and municipalities around the world have started paying great attention to it and con-stantly reform the urban wastes management system, making it an important part of the green economy and sustainable development . The majorities of OSW are composed of https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.122778 Received 18 November 2019; Received in revised form 6 January 2020; Accepted 7 January 2020⁎Corresponding author at: College of Natural Resources and Environment, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi Province 712100, PR China. E-mail address: mukesh_awasthi45@yahoo.com .Bioresource Technology 301  122778 Available online 10 January 2020 0960-8524/ © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. T animal wastes, municipal and agricultural wastes, thus OSWs are gen- erally rich in nutrient substances, such as proteins, minerals, and su- gars, which can be reused as raw materials in the production of green energy . Nevertheless, due to the restrictions of the allocated budgets, infrastructure development, OSW management is still su ﬀering from improper treatment in most developing and even in few developed countries. Therefore, the most decisive factors in OSWmanagement is to develop an economically sustainable process fol- lowed by technically feasible, socially and legally acceptable as well as environment friendly. Hence, OSW management is usually one of the most important challenges for the authorities and a hot research topic all over the world . Based on the characteristics of the OSW, they are generally treated to be converted into organicfertilizer or directly transport to land ﬁll sites or incineration facilities. Therefore, the conventional methods including land ﬁll, incineration, and composting are traditional matured technologies for OSW man- agement. Di ﬀerent processing technologies possess varied advantages and also drawbacks as well. On the other hand, biological technologiesfor OSW treatment are now-a-days seriously considered in the world because of the characteristics of low energy consumption, low cost and investment, high organic removal rate and meeting the requirement of circular economy . However, due to the di ﬀerent economical possibilities of various countries and the OSW treatmenttechnologies, traditionally, the most commonly applied technologies are still land ﬁll in developing countries and incineration in most of the developed countries. Composting and anaerobic digestion  depend on the decom- position and degradation of organic matter in OSW to stable substances,such as humus and digestate could be applied to soil as a fertilizer orsoil improvement if their qualities are at standard level. During the AD process, biogas that is rich in methane and carbon dioxide are pro- duced, which could be used as a fuel for combustion in transport orenergy production . Meanwhile, though these two tech- nologies are not new, they probably could have a key role in achievingcircular economy objectives to divert OSW from land ﬁll and incinera- tion and improving the circularity of biological nutrients. However,there are still many practical and technical issues that need to be ad- dressed in the application of these two biological treatment methods . In Europe, 60 million tons of OSW could be po- tentially recycled by AD and composting technologies ( Felix et al., 2019 ). This would save about one million tons of nitrogen and 20 million tons of organic carbon . At present, most of these nutrients are lost through land ﬁlling organic waste. The European Commission reported that the European countries in average recycleonly 5% of the total OSW. It is estimated that if a higher portion of OSWs could be recycled and reused, it could replace approximately 30% of the chemical fertilizer applied to soil, that means 1.8 million tons phosphate fertilizer every year . OSW can be converted to vary products through di ﬀerent processing technologies, such as fertilizer, heat, clean fuel from AD, plant and soil food from composting as well as methane from land ﬁll. Despite this, either composting or AD must be fully understood prior to their widerdeployment. This review comprehensively describes the current gen- eration state of the OSW and di ﬀerent disposal technologies, particu- larly for composting and AD and elaborating on the details of theirtreatment process and their environmental, social and economicTable 1 Wastes production by economic and household activities until 2016 on percentage basis. Countries Mining and quarrying Manufacturing Energy Construction and demolition Other economic activities Households EU-28 25 10 3 36 16 8 Belgium 0 23 1 31 36 8 Bulgaria 82 3 8 2 3 2 Czechia 1 18 4 40 23 14 Denmark 0 5 4 58 16 17 Germany 2 14 3 55 17 9 Estonia 26 37 25 5 6 2 Ireland 16 35 2 10 28 10 Greece 78 6 4 1 4 7 Spain 16 11 3 28 26 17 France 1 7 0 69 14 9 Croatia 12 8 2 24 31 22 Italy 0 17 2 33 29 18 Cyprus 5 33 0 36 10 16 Latvia 0 19 11 4 30 34 Lithuania 1 41 2 8 32 17 Luxemburg 0 7 0 75 11 6 Hungary 1 17 16 23 25 18 Malta 8 1 0 69 13 8 Netherlands 0 10 1 70 13 6 Austria 0 9 1 73 10 7 Poland 39 17 11 10 18 5 Portugal 3 17 1 12 35 33 Romania 87 4 4 0 3 2 Slovenia 0 26 14 10 38 12 Slovakia 3 32 9 9 29 18 Finland 76 8 1 11 3 1 Sweden 77 4 1 7 7 3 United Kingdom 6 4 0 49 30 10 Iceland 0 25 0 4 31 40 Liechtenstein 3 2 0 88 1 5 Norway 3 14 2 27 32 22 Montenegro 19 2 18 37 10 13 North Macedonia 49 51 0 0 0 0 Serbia 79 3 12 1 2 3 Turkey 11 26 37 Bosnia and Herzegovina 2 27 71 0 0 0 Kosovo 14 20 40 6 10 11 Source :Eurostat , 2016 .S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 2 applicability. Both of these two technologies are not completely eco- nomically feasible, because of which they have not been successful applied in many countries. A deep insight has been attempted in this paper to make a better understanding for the importance of its eco- nomic viability. 2. Organic solid waste generation The constant increase of worldwide population to more than seven billion plus the continuous improvement of global welfare has resulted in a rapid increase of the daily consumption of resources and products, thus tremendous amount of recyclable wastes is generated ( Alejandra et al., 2018). The generation of wastes per capita in most of the in-dustrial countries are higher than developing countries, which is most likely connected to the socio-economic status of the country. Taking the EU as an example, EU-28 nations produced nearly 25.38 million tons of wastes through all the activities including economic and households in 2016. Amongst it, the speci ﬁc waste output of each EU nation also il- lustrated that the total amount of wastes generated had a certain degreeof negligible relationship with the economic scale and population of a nation . It can be clearly observed from Table 1 that the EU member states with the smallest population and area pos-sessed the lowest waste generation, oppositely the large nations owned the highest production. However, Italy had a relatively high amount of wastes generation, while Bulgaria and Romania possessed relatively low level of waste. It is reported that in urban and rural areas of EU and other Asia countries, the level of solid wastes generation ranges from 0.9 to 1.6, and 0.7 to 1.5 kg per capita per day, respectively while the urban areas generate approximately 1.3 billion tons of solid wastes in 2015. It is estimated that it will increase to 2.2 billion tons by 2025 . Generally, the produced solid wastes are composed by agricultural and industrial wastes including leather, wood, glass, paper, green waste biomass, household wastes, and electronic wastes, such as computers, telephones, refrigerators, and televisions as well as also construction, demolition wastes and medical wastes . As mentioned above, in most of the developing countries, the massivepopulation growth and the acceleration of urbanization as well as the continuous improvement of people ’s living standards have signi ﬁcantly resulted in increasing the amount of urban wastes. The population allover the world was about 7.2 billion in 2013 and it will reach to 9.6 billion by 2050 . The population in urban areas is prognosed to account for 86% and 64% of the total populationin developed and developing countries, respectively . Meanwhile, the dramatic increase of urban population will also result ininfrastructural and strategic challenges as well as adverse land-use changes. Waste to energy technologies could turn as wise choices to deal with these circumstances and provide long-term and cost-e ﬀective solutions for the growing energy requirements and sustainable wastemanagement. It is estimated that only from the global urban waste collection market can produce around $410 billion income ( Waste Management World, 2017 ). However currently, only a quarter of wastes are recycled. Hence, recycling and utilizing OSW by applying biotechnologies has great bright prospects and market in the near fu- ture . 3. Current organic solid waste treatment technologies Various options are available for converting organic solid wastes into useful resources. Although pure cultures are ideal or synthesizing chemicals at high speci ﬁcity and thus requiring minimal puriﬁ cation prior to ﬁnal use, they require single substrates in the form of e.g. su- gars. This has major drawbacks as it raises the cost of production and also competes for resources required for growing food and feed for humans and animals, thus raising ethical debates. Natural mixed bac- terial consortia are therefore an attractive option for treating theabundantly available heterogeneous solid wastes and enables resourcerecovery in the form of energy and high-value platform chemicals through anaerobic digestion. These bacterial systems are also robust and have the capacity to withstand stressful micro-environments. Among the biological solid waste treatment possibilities provided in this section, only the production of biogas has been widely commer- cialized. The other products of ADs are mainly at research stage, pro- viding opportunities for further scienti ﬁc investigations and develop- ment . 3.1. Biogas production AD is an established biological processing technique suitable for stabilizing a plethora of organic solid wastes coupled with recovery of energy and nutrients. It provides a sustainable option for providing renewable materials and fuels thereby contributing to circular economy . Indeed, there are indications of that the biogas industry is steadily growing due to apparent substantial reduction of thecapital and operating costs of AD facilities. Indeed, it has been esti- mated that the cost of production of biogas in AD facilities would re- duce by about 38% in 2050 compared to 2015 . Globally, it the estimated that biogas production had an average growth rate of11.2% reaching up to 58.7 billion Nm 3in 2017 . The AD process takes place in oxygen-de ﬁcient environments and is catalyzed by natural microbial communities in a four-stage complex process, resulting into mainly biogas. A pretreatment step, carried out either biologically, chemically or physically, can precede the actualbiodegradation process in order to adequately prepare substrates with diﬃcult structures such as lignocelluloses ( Taherzadeh and Karimi, 2008; Sarsaiya et al., 2019a ). The AD process kinetics are determined by the nature of substrates and the physico-chemical parameters, such as the pH, temperature and hydraulic retention time . The details of the reactions taking place during the breakdown of thesolid wastes during AD are provided in previous reviews ( Aryal et al., 2018; Merlin Christy et al., 2014; Weiland, 2010 ). In summary, in the ﬁrst stage hydrolytic microbes break down the complex macro- molecules into simple monomers with the help of enzymes such asamylases, lipases, and proteases. The second stage applies acidogenic microbes and converts the soluble products produced in the ﬁrst step into biomolecules, such as alcohols, volatile fatty acids , hy-drogen (H 2) and carbon dioxide . These products then serve as substrates for acidogens for synthesis of mainly acetic acid in the thirdstage. The ﬁnal stage is the most sensitive and greatly relies on the success of the previous reactions in which methanogens convert aceticacid, hydrogen and carbon dioxide into biogas. The methanogens follow mainly the acetotrophic  and Wood Ljungdahl pathways for production of CH 4from acetic acid and the reaction be- tween H 2and CO 2,respectively, with the latter being more common . The chemical composition of raw biogas from a typical solid waste AD facility is based on the process conditions. It consists of 50 –75% CH4,3 0 –50% CO 2,0–3% N 2, ~6% H 20, 0 –1% O 2,7 2 –7200 ppm H2S, 72 –144 ppm NH 3and other minor impurities ( Kapoor et al., 2019; Yentekakis and Goula, 2017). The raw biogas can be directlyapplied for generating electricity and heat while upgraded gas (bio- methane) can be injected into the natural gas grid or used as vehicle fuel . The latter application has been reported to having the potential of aiding in reducing road transport - related greenhouse gas emissions by up to 25% . In order to use the biogas as a transport fuel, an extra treatment is required for removal of CO 2and other impurities, such as H 2S and water vapor. Gas cleaning is the initial step for removal of impurities that could damagemechanical and electrical appliances during the use of biogas and can be achieved using adsorption with silica gel and activated carbon or molecular sieves. Upgrading techniques mainly for separation of CO 2 from CH 4in order to raise the calori ﬁc value of the gas are waterS. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 3 scrubbing, pressure swing adsorption, cryogenic technology, membrane separation and organic scrubbing using amines such as diethanolamine, diglycolamine and monoethanolamine . 3.2. Hydrogen production Energy recovery from solid wastes can also be achieved via the dark fermentation process. Compared to the conventional production routessuch as steam reforming of methane and non-catalytic partial oxidation of fossil fuels, production of hydrogen from wastes not only reduces the reliance on the depleting petroleum resources but at the same time it isless energy-intensive as well . Hydrogen has a higher heating value compared to methane  ( Liu et al., 2013 ). It’s thus a potential clean energy source especially for the transport industry. Its other areas of application include production ofelectronics, processing of steel as well as hydrogenation of fats and oils . A number of organic solid wastes that have been explored for hydrogen production are provided in Table 2. The dark fermentation process is principally an intermediate within the AD process in which hydrogen is released. Thus, relevant para-meters suitable for biosynthesis of hydrogen while at the same time deactivating the methanogens that would otherwise consume it are optimized . Some of the important process parameters for ideal hydrogen production include the pH level, tem-perature and bioreactor design. Fang and Liu  reported an op- timal pH level of 5.5 while mesophilic and thermophilic temperatureranges were found to stimulate hydrogen production from wastes compared to psychrophilic conditions ( Wang and Wan, 2008; Wang and Wan, 2009 ). Hydrogen fermentation systems also require appropriate bioreactor design to supply necessary hydrodynamic properties such as suﬃcient mixing . It is worth mentioning that the presence of other by-products, such as volatile fatty acids  atcertain concentrations can negatively impact on the microbial hydrogen production due to potential inhibition or even the depletion of hy- drogen associated with formation of some VFAs. Potential solutions, such as the use of membrane bioreactors, have been proposed as ef- fective in removing the VFAs as they are being formed and thereby improving the gas production . 3.3. Production of soluble biochemicals 3.3.1. Volatile fatty acids VFAs are short-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids also formed as in- termediaries during the AD process before the methanogenesis stageand consist between 2 and 6 carbon atoms. Petroleum resources are currently utilized for industrial synthesis of VFAs and replacing these resources with solid wastes as the primary feedstock creates and at- tractive circular economy pathway. The success of the acidi ﬁcation in AD reactors depends on optimization of operating parameters, such thepH, temperature, organic loading rate  and the hydraulic reten- tion time  as well as employing appropriate means to deactivate the methanogenic VFAs-consumers ( Atasoy et al., 2018; Lim et al., 2008, Wainaina et al., 2019a ).Table 3 gives the performance of some waste-to-VFAs systems. These acids have the potential for use as building blocks in a wide spectrum of industrial processes. For instance, acetic acid can be ap- plied in pharmaceutical industries, propionic acid for manufacture of paints, butyric acid for manufacture of perfumes while caproic acid is used for preparation of food additives. The mixed solution of these VFAs also has important applications in wastewater treatment plants for biological removal of nitrogen and phosphorus, biosynthesis of mixed alcohols as well as production of biodegradable plastics. Moreover, the VFAs can be applied to generate electricity in microbial fuels cells in addition to serving as the carbon source for bioprocessing of biodiesel . In order to facilitate practical production systems, recovery and puriﬁ cation of VFAs from fermentation broths are crucial. This involves primary separation of the liquid VFA fraction from the solid contents inthe bioreactor made up of the cells and nutrients, which might be suﬃcient for some applications. However, for some application areas, more complex fractionation is needed for attaining the strict purityrequirements. Adsorption, gas stripping and electrodialysis are ex- amples of relevant methods proved to be e ﬀective in separation of the VFAs in model carboxylate solutions . Some re- searchers have also designed systems with the recovery procedurerunning concurrently with the actual microbial process in the so-called in situ product recovery using membrane-aided techniques ( Arslan et al., 2017; Wainaina et al., 2019b ). The bene ﬁts of such schemes are the supply of the carboxylates for subsequent processing without in-troduction of foreign soluble chemicals, in addition to the relief on the microbes from potential harmful e ﬀects of un-dissociated acid mole- cules. 3.3.2. Lactic acid Lactic acid is a carboxylate with a market potential of USD 3.82 billion by 2020 used for production of acrylic acid, biodegradable polymers, pyruvic acid, 1, 2-propanediol, among others ( Bonk et al., 2017; Phanthumchinda et al., 2018 ). Its main area of application is as a building block for poly  which has a high estimated market value of USD 5.16 billion by 2020 due to the mounting ecological concerns and supportive government policies ( Phanthumchinda et al., 2018 ). A signi ﬁcant portion of the global industrial production is from fermentation, which is controlled by factors such as pH, temperature and nitrogen concentration . The lactic acid bacteria  are popular for processing single su- gars into lactic acid. In the AD systems, a variety of organic residues, such as food wastes and organic fraction of municipal solid waste, can be processed using microbes such as Lactobacilli during the acidogenic phase .Gu et al.  for instance achieved a lactic acid buildup of up to 74.3% in a leach bed reactor treating food waste. Another research by Bonk et al.  developed an AD reactor coupled with a percolation system which yielded lacticacid at 0.15 g chemical oxygen demand equivalent per g total solids fed (gCOD/gTS fed) from food waste with lactic acid concentration of up to 16.4 g COD/L. As with the VFAs, appropriate product separation and puriﬁ cation methods are required to enhance the purity of lactic acid. One of the possible e ﬀorts involved a membrane-assisted lactic acid recovery method that incorporated micro ﬁltration for cell removal, ultraﬁltration for protein removal, and reverse osmosis for con- centrating the lactic acid at high purity . Fig. 1. Potential feed stock, conversion technologies and products.S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 4 3.3.3. Other potential biochemicals The AD process also synthesizes other useful metabolites, although in low concentrations. According to Zhou et al.  , the possible metabolic pathways during the acidogenic biodegradation of wastes can lead to biosynthesis of other chemicals alongside VFAs, lactic acid and hydrogen. One such metabolite is succinic acid which can be ap- plied in key industrial processes such as manufacture of inks, polymers and pharmaceuticals, and is bio-synthesized via the tricarboxylic acid cycle  . The use of pure microbes such as Acti- nobacillus succinogenes and an engineered Escherichia coli strain was found to e ﬀectively convert food waste hydrolysate into succinic acid. Concentrations of up to 8.5 g/L were detected during biodegradation of food waste at pH 5.0 . Such a performance indicates the potential for mixed bacterial consortium for metabolizing succinate that could be investigated in future studies. Ethanol has also been detected in small amounts from anaerobic di- gestion digesters. For instance, acidi ﬁcation of food waste yielded low concentrations at pH 6 and 7 . In another study, Zhang et al.  found that ethanol made up 33.8% of the liquid fraction during the thermophilic AD of glucose. One proposal to raisethe concentration of ethanol by Zhou et al.  would be providing high H 2partial pressure in the head space of acidiﬁ cation reactors.Table 2 Potential organic waste substrates and optimal conditions for hydrogen production. Substrate Operating conditions Hydrogen production performance Reference Melon waste Continuous fermentation T = 55 °C HRT = 5 dayspH = 5.0Yield = 352 mL/gVS added Akinbomi and Taherzadeh  Melon waste Batch essay T = 36 °C pH = 5.5 –6.0Productivity = 351.12 mLH 2/Lreactor .h  Apple waste Continuous fermentation T = 55 °CHRT = 5 dayspH = 5.0Yield = 635 mL/gVS added Akinbomi and Taherzadeh  Mixed food waste Continuous fermentation T = 55 °CHRT = 5 dayspH = 5.5Yield = 1.80 mol-H 2/mol-hexose Shin et al.  Mixed food waste Batch essay T = 55 °CInitial pH = 7.0Yield = 176.10 mL H 2/gCOD Wongthanate and Mongkarothai  Waste peach pulp Batch essay T = 37 °CInitial pH = 5.9Productivity = 35.6 mLH 2/h Argun and Dao  Fruit and vegetable waste Batch essay T = 55 °C Initial pH = 7.0Yield = 76 mL H 2/g VS Keskin et al.  Waste bread Continuous fermentation T = 55 °C HRT = 6 hpH˃4.0Production rate = 7.4 LH 2/L/d Han et al.  Table 3 Potential organic waste substrates and optimal conditions for production of volatile fatty acids. Solid waste Optimal conditions Production performance Reference Olive mill solid waste Batch-fed fermentation T = 35 °C pH = 9.0Concentration = 3.69 gCOD/L Cabrera et al.  Mixed food waste Semi-continuous fermentation * T = 37 °CHRT = 6.67 daysOLR = 2 gVS/L/dpH = 3.6 –4.1Yield = 0.54 gVFA/VS fed Wainaina et al.  Mixed food waste Semi-continuous fermentation T = 35 °CHRT = 12 days pH = 5.5Yield = 0.39 gVFA/VS fed Lim et al.  Meat and bone meal Batch fermentation T = 55 °C pH = 10.0Yield = 0.46 gCOD/gCOD Garcia-Aguirre et al.  Organic fraction of municipal solid waste Continuous fermentation T = 55 °CHRT = 3.3 days OLR = 20.5 kgVS/m 3/d pH≥4.0Yield = 0.31 gCOD/gCOD inVFA concentration = 16.0 gCOD/L Valentino et al.  Waste activated sludge Batch fermentation T = 21 °C pH = 10.0Concentration = 2708.02 mg/L Chen et al.  *A membrane bioreactor was used for simultaneous fermentation and product recovery.S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 5 3.4. Nutrient recovery The anaerobic digestion  is considered as one of the foremost cost-eﬀective biological treatments of the biowaste. It permits vitality recuperation and the generation of nutrient-rich digestate whereas lessening natural impacts of the waste transfer. It contains most of the supplements from the input material and can be utilized as fertilizer or organic amendment for farming. The natural supplement circle locally the digestate that needs to be utilized in ranches found adjacent to the mAD  units . The bio- waste is utilized to provide vitality and recover other nutrients not onlybecause it advances towards the ﬁnancial conditions of a country, but besides makes a di ﬀerence towards ﬁnancial change of human society . Recognizably, the two forms, i.e., anaerobic di- gestion and composting, facilitates together since the solid fraction ofdigestate can be treated vigorously so as to recover both renewable energy and nutrients from common waste . These pro ﬁtable nutrients display in natural strong waste which are eﬃciently misplaced, can be recovered through appropriate biochem- ical technologies and utilized as nutrient-rich fertilizers in rural areasfor keeping up soil richness and arrive rebuilding hones at low-input premise. In this way, impressive emphasis is being focused on receiving biologically sound on best of ﬁnancially maintainable and socially ac- ceptable tools which reinforce potential recuperation of nutrients, withleast contamination load . Theﬁnal product, compost, may be a result of microbial action and contains mineral nutrients suchas nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium . Unfortunately, for nutrients recuperation it is exceptionally weak material in its raw form,but can contribute in 9.4% of P and 5% of N presented with inorganic fertilizers individually . Terax TMtechnology gives numerous opportunities for resource re- covery such as changing over waste into value-added items, nutrient recuperation from natural waste, and metal expulsion from naturalwaste . There are still various challenge's heads for AnMBR stage applications to be handled, especially for extreme ﬁlmfouling, moo methane substance in biogas, exceedingly broken-down methane, destitute smelling salts expulsion and phosphorus recupera- tion, etc. To address the above issues, a new-generation process , i.e. so-called “Integrated Multistage Bio-Process  ”constituted of solar-driven bioelectrochemical framework -AnMBR, fractionalnitritation/anammox , nitrate decrease through anaerobic oxi- dation of methane  and biological/chemical phosphorus pre- cipitation units have been examined in this article, with ﬂexible cap- abilities in synchronous biowastes valorization, CO 2electro- methanogenesis and synchronous biogas overhauling, in-situ fouling control, alkali expulsion, broken up methane reutilization, and phos-phorus recoup as hydroxyapatite-rich supplements . 3.5. Composting/co-composting Composting process occurs naturally in the environment, although eﬃcient composting is needed to control several factors to avoid en- vironmental challenges such as odor and dust, and for obtaining aquality agricultural manure. Generally, composting process are divided into two phases, the bio-oxidative phase and the maturing phase also named as curing phase . The bio-oxidative phase again carried out in three stages, such as initial activation, thermophilicand mesophilic or maturation phase. The organic waste degradation occurs during the thermophilic phase and microorganisms degrade the available compounds in the organic waste . In this phase, high temperature generation in the composting pile observeddue to the heat generated from the composting pile due to the microbial degradation of organic waste . Generally, high temperature is required i.e. 55 °C to destroy pathogens in the organicsolid waste and usually composting piles reach temperatures as high as 70 °C during the degradation of animal manure and green waste ( Singh and Kalamdhad, 2014; Tang et al., 2011; Cáceres et al., 2015 ). In ad- dition, in this stage the organic compounds degraded to CO 2and NH 3 , with the uptake of O 2. Finally, when the exhaustion of decomposable organic fraction in the waste Fig. 2. Biogas production and the potential applications.S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 6 achieved, the temperature starts decreasing in the composting pile and hence beginning of the maturation phase observed and stabilization and humiﬁcation of the organic matter occur, producing a mature compost with humic characteristics . Hence, this compost can be characterized as the stable and sanitized product that make the composting for sustainable agriculture and resource man- agement ( Haug, 1993; Ravindran et al., 2019; Gajalakshmi and Abbasi, 2008 ). Over the last decades, researchers have been focusing on the study of the complex interaction between physical, chemical and biologicalfactors that takes place during natural composting under controlled conditions. There are several factors a ﬀecting the composting process, such as nutrient balance, pH, porosity and moisture of the compostingmixture, aeration, moisture content and temperature. Thus, the control of these parameters such as, porosity, nutrient content, C/N ratio, temperature, pH, moisture and oxygen supply have established to be key factors for optimization of composting process as they determine the optimal conditions for organic matter degradation and microbial growth ( Agnew and Leonard, 2003; Das and Keener, 1996; Haug, 1993; Richard et al., 2002). The e ﬀectiveness of compost material with regard to their bene ﬁcial eﬀects on agricultural as a nutrient source, depends on the quality of the compost. The quality criteria for compost materialare determined by their nutrient content, organic matter stabilization, presence of heavy metals and toxic compounds. The traditional composting process results in partial decomposition, which has phytotoxic e ﬀects in the ﬁnal product ( Ravindran et al., 2014 ). In order to overcome the conventional composting limitations, several researchers have employed an in-vessel composting strategy for diﬀerent types of waste such as ﬂy ash with organic waste ( Mandpe et al., 2019); swine manure ( Awasthi et al., 2019a; Yang et al., 2019; Ravindran et al., 2019); municipal solid waste ( Malinowski et al., 2019 ); sewage sludge . An in-vessel composting system provides a controlled environment, which eliminates some ofthe obstacles inherent in traditional composting systems for producing nutrient rich matured manure. Despite that, environmental concerns related to composting existed, and can be categorized into three aspects described below; 3.5.1. Residual pollutants from contaminated feedstocks Due to the existing contaminants in the feedstock, the levels of re- sidual pollutants partly determined the feasibility of composting in ﬁeld utilization. Such contaminants include heavy metals, organic pollu- tants, and emerging contaminants. Heavy metals refer to metallic chemical elements that had a higher density and 4.5 cm 3. Due to the high toxicity, long persistence, and bio-magni ﬁcation traits, heavy metal accumulation in soils have become a global issue ( Yang et al., 2017 ). Feedstock for composting, such as animal manure or sewage sludge, generally contain a certain amount of heavy metals, and these metals would be concentrated in the compost with the degradation of an organic compound, although the bio-availability is reduced ( Li et al., 2012 ). For example, a nationwide survey on heavy metal content in compost derived from animals manures found the concentration of Zn, Cu, Cr, Ni, Pb, As, Co, Cd, and Hg ranged from 11.8 to 3692, 3.6 to 916, 0.7 to 6603, 0.7 to 73, 0.05 to 189, 0.4 to 72, 0.1 to 94, 0.01 to 8.7, and 0.01 to 1.9 mg kg−1, respectively . There were even higher levels of heavy metals in other feed stock ’s like sewage sludge . Accordingly, government across di ﬀerent countries have introduced strict standard to regulate the maximumpermissible values for organic compost. Organic pollutants such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons  such as polychlorinated biphenyl , pesticides, and petro-leum were generally found in compost ( Ren et al., 2018; Houot et al., 2012 ). Even though the concentrations of such pollutants were gen- erally reduced through composting via biodegradation, the concentra- tion of residual organic pollutants might be higher than the background levels, which means inputs of such compost should be limited . The other residues pollutants are antibiotic resistance genes and emerging contaminants such as micro particle, hormone, and perﬂuorinated compounds . There were also high content of antibiotic in the common feedstock’ s of composting (i.e., sludge and manures), and studies focused on the fate of antibiotics and antibiotics resistance genes have become a research hotspot since 2009 ( Ezzariai et al., 2018 ). However, studies on the transformation of antibiotic re- sistance genes are still limited, and the obtained results are partly contracted with each other . Therefore, more detailed research on the fate of antibiotic residencegenes during composting should be further investigated. 3.5.2. Odors During composting, series of stinky gases such as hydrogen sul ﬁde, volatile organic sul ﬁdes, ammonia, pyridine, amines, hydrocarbons, terpenes, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, and esters were generated ( Wei et al., 2017 ). Additionally, the constitution and concentration of dif- ferent compounds varied signi ﬁcantly and a ﬀected by the feed stock properties, composting operation conditions, and the ambient en- vironment . Even though their concentrations are quite low, emission of odors gases can lead to signi ﬁcant allergy among the neighbor. Fortunately, we can signi ﬁcantly reduce the emission of odors nowadays by mediating ingredient properties, enhancing aera-tion, providing catalysts and inoculant, and building airtight com- posting facilities. More speci ﬁcally, providing enzymatic catalysts on the surface of a compost pile or in the airspace above it can facilitate thebiological reaction and eventually degrade the odorous compounds. Additionally, the addition of straw materials, chemical reagents (such as FeCl 3, lime, and MgO), and biochars can e ﬀectively prevent the emission of odors during composting ( Ren et al., 2018; González et al., 2019 ). 4. Challenges and prospects of bio-based circular economy The term “bio-based circular economy ”can refer to an approach that promotes the reuse and valorization of organic wastes and re- sidues. In the recent years, it has more essential options for the con- version of bio-waste and their intermediate products into bioenergy or secondary raw materials . 4.1. Integrated organic solid waste treatments technologies Rapid urbanization is surely creating enormous pressure on the urban bodies to deal with the demands of the developing populace andthe consistently expanding huge amounts of waste all through the world . Because of lack of information and inappropriate waste gathering frameworks theuntreated waste eventually arrives at the land ﬁlls and are responsible of aggravating the natural conditions. Inability in completely grasping allthe issues identi ﬁed with the management of municipal solid waste  ends up being one of the most challenging issues of degradingthe environment. MSW contains a signi ﬁcant portion  of or- ganics . The amount of each waste stream within the total solid waste generated varies with changes in speci ﬁc parameters . At present, waste is viewed as an important asset rather than re- cognizing it to be useless and resource extraction from them is one ofthe primary goals of sustainable waste management . A few treatment technologies are feasible with varying waste manage-ment abilities . However, no single technique can ﬁx the issue of waste management . Therefore, an integrated approach towards the treatment of solid waste is of greatimportance. It not just gives an adaptable waste treatment decision  but energy and asset recovery can likewise be eﬀectively accomplished through it . The signi ﬁcant reason behind treating the organic waste is to recover recyclables andS. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 7 energy from it and furthermore to improve the quality of the waste handling it . Organic solid waste treatment technologies may incorporate either a combination of mechanical, thermal or biological treatments or any ofthe three separately. The signi ﬁcant ones being the thermal and bio- logical treatment techniques . An integrated approach is certainly required which should be from its generation to its ﬁnal dis- posal. The treatment procedure chosen ought to be such that it ac-complishes the objectives of waste management. When the waste is explicitly organic in nature the biological procedures plays the main job, which are the aerobic and anaerobic digestion, bio-land ﬁlling, bio- drying and vermicomposting. Aerobic digestion transforms the easilydegradable organic waste aerobically into soil conditioners and carbon dioxide with resulting heat production . Whereas anaerobic digestion involves degrading the organic waste anaerobicallywhich leads to recovery of energy in form of biogas ( Tchobanoglous et al., 2004 ). In this process, the organic waste gets decomposed by diﬀerent microbial actions. However, in comparison to aerobic diges- tion, anaerobic digestion produces less solid sludge . Bio-land ﬁlling is another procedure utilized for managing the solid waste that upgrades the waste degradation and also increases themeasure of biogas formation . Anaerobic processing and bio-land ﬁlling varies just in the utilization of reactor type which is simply the land ﬁll itself during bio-land ﬁlling. Bio drying is another such approach that aides in diminishing the measure of waterpresent in the natural waste which would some way or another hamper the energy recuperation process . It additionally helps in saving energy for usage in residue derived fuels ( Adani et al., 2002 ). All the major integrated organic waste treatment technologies discussed above have been shown in Fig. 3. All these technologies re- quire a legitimate identi ﬁcation and assessment of accessible options, planning, collection, isolation, treatment and ﬁnal disposal. In addition, understanding the potential interrelationships between various treat- ment options would help in building up an integrated approach where all the individual techniques supplement one another.4.2. Techno-economic feasibility of aerobic and anaerobic digestiontechnologies “Wastes from one industrial process can serve as the raw materials for another, thereby reducing the impact of industry in the environ- ment ”was described by Frosch and Gallopoulos  . Eco-industrial parks are making collaborate with other inter-company to optimize theresource e ﬃciency. They can share the resources, water, and energy. Whereas working together, the community of businesses looking forcollective bene ﬁts rather than individual bene ﬁts. Hence, the eco-in- dustrial parks make industrial symbiosis for improvement of theireconomic status by sharing the raw materials and wastes. An anaerobic digestion process is a process, that can biochemically modify the whole biomass into speci ﬁc components and this process can produce carbon dioxide, phosphorus and ammonia to improve the economic and en-vironmental bene ﬁts. The biochemical processes in anaerobic digestion are nature. It is accepted and established as an innovative technology toproduce the bio energy from whole biomass ( Kavitha et al., 2017; Stiles et al., 2018 ). An assessment of techno-economic analysis and life cycle are es- sential for any processes to be sustainable, which can be analysis bythree parameters like economical viability, technical feasibility and environmental sustainability. There are number of industries and in- vestors looking the production of biogas using anaerobic digestion method for generation of energy and a high-risk investment, because of its process like feedstock supply, segregation of solid waste, char- acteristics features of feedstock, pro ﬁt issues and optional problems . Based on the above facts, the many governments have support and encourage by provide the funds to company for this area. According to Waste Management World  , the global biogas market will reach $50 billion on 2026, hence it is crucial for scientistand researchers to conduct their research on anaerobic digestion at systems level, as well as techno-economic and environmental bene ﬁts perspective. So, it is very essential to assess integrated analyses ofeconomic viability and technical feasibility on anaerobic digestiontechnologies. The economic analysis for particular process is analyzed by values of materials for construction, interest rate and labor cost . The techno-economic analysis and life cycle Fig. 3. Schematic presentation of integrated food waste and wastewater treatment method  and conventional sludge  treatment by anaerobic digestion .S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 8 assessment  are providing the insights on the feasibility of a process and it is very important for bioenergy and bio-based products . Techno-economic evaluation determines that max- imum funds spent in biogas puriﬁ cation for various applications in- cluding the power-to-gas, electricity and vehicle fuel. Various anaerobic digester upgrading methods are available with membrane separation, water scrubbing, pressure adsorption and solvent scrubbing. Hence, the government has high cost for upgrading the anaerobic systems ( Bauer et al., 2013; International Energy Agency, 2015 ). Anaerobic co-digestion process is gradually more used to change the liquid and solid waste into nutrient rich content and reduce the impactof noxious compounds in the process and enhance the yield of biogas . It is considered as the most important method for the management of biomass to production of biogas, and the digestatecan be used as bio-fertilizer. This process can completely eliminate the pathogens  and to prevent the emission of greenhouse gases ( Torquati et al., 2014; Weiland, 2010 ). United Kingdome and Hong Kong have strong-willed to sponsor the use anaerobic digestion methods for energy production and re-covery. It also ful ﬁls the Sustainable Development Goals  for development of renewable energy . In Italy, there are 35% of biogas plants that produce 70 –100 MW electricity, which straight relate to government incentives ( Gestore Servizi Energetici, 2015 ). During the techno-economic analysis, three areas of anaerobic di- gestion process are important:  unit operations with collection and transport of feed stocks,  to provide the treatment facility for pro- duction of biogas, and  upgrading the bio-energy for various appli- cations as electricity and liquid methane for household cooking. There is 20 –50% of budget allotted to collect and transport the waste by manual collection or trucks/trailers in the sector of municipalities andcorporations . In Ireland, cost of $22 –35/ month was spent to waste collection from various sectors like houses and industries for anaerobic digestion .Fig. 4 shows the cost associated with complete value chain of anaerobicdigestion for solid waste. 4.3. Proposed models for a circular economy 4.3.1. Co-digestion Biodegradation of more than one type of waste in one anaerobic bioreactor, albeit in appropriate proportions, is a promising technique for increasing product yields ascribed to the balance of nutrients that enhances microbial performance coupled with the economic bene ﬁts of treating a variety of materials in a single facility ( Abad et al., 2019; Awasthi et al., 2019b; PagésDíaz et al., 2011 ). Several researchers have observed improvement of AD systems from a number of solid wastesdemonstrating that anaerobic co-digestion, illustrated in Fig. 5 a, could be a favorable method for achieving circular economy. A study by Panichnumsin et al.  reported that an increase of 41% in the speci ﬁc methane yield would be realized when a cassava pulp/pig manure mixture was applied in the ratio of 3:2 relative to the use of pig manure alone. The potential cause of the improved perfor- mance was the improved process stability as well as an increase in the amounts of easily degradable macromolecules ( Panichnumsin et al., 2010 ). In another study, improved bu ﬀering capacity and suitable carbon-to-nitrogen ratio were found to facilitate a stable AD process at high organic load even without regulation of pH when food waste and cattle manure were in ratio of 2:1 leading to an increase in the methane production by 55.2% compared to food waste alone ( Zhang et al., 2013 ). The co-digestion strategy is also bene ﬁcial  when targeting other AD bio-products such as H 2and VFAs. A research by Zhou et al.  examined several mixtures containing food waste, primary sludge andwaste activated sludge and concluded that co-digestion of the substrates improved hydrogen production compared to single substrates. The optimal increase was realized when a food waste/primary sludge/waste activated sludge mixture was applied at a ratio 80:15:5 ( Zhou et al., 2013b ). The impact of co-digesting waste activated sludge and corn straw was investigated by Zhou et al.  . They observed an im- provement in the maximum VFAs yield reaching up to 69% when a Fig. 4. Various costs associated with the value chain of waste treatment from collection to products generation. .S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 9 ratio of 1:1 of the mentioned substances was used compared to sludge only in addition to the manipulation of the product pro ﬁle. Further results indicated that protein and carbohydrate consumption were en-hanced by more than 120 and 220%, respectively . Besides the conventional wet digestion, solid wastes can also be biodegraded at high total solids content of between 15 and 40% in theso-called dry AD processes using e.g. horizontal plug ﬂow, sequential batch, textile-based, and vertical plug ﬂow reactors. Dry AD is a pro- mising technology for regions with low water availability and might also evade the pretreatment step for recalcitrant materials in addition to requiring more compact bioreactors . An in- crease in methane yield of 14% was achieved when citrus wastes,chicken feather and wheat straw at a ratio of 1:1:6 in dry batch AD assays compared to single substrates. When the same substrate ratio was used in a continous plug ﬂow bioreactor, a yield of 362 NmLCH 4/ gVS added at a loading rate of 2 gVS/L/d was obtained ( Patinvoh et al., 2018 ). Another dry AD process was demonstrated by Capson-Tojo et al.  in which food waste and cardboard were co-digested in batch mode. Their research focused on the impact inoculum-to-substrate ratio which was found to have a signi ﬁcant in ﬂuence on the methane yield, microbial dynamics as well as the productions of hydrogen and VFAs. 4.3.2. Recovery of multiple products The AD process can be employed for the recovery of more than a single metabolite at reasonable yields, thereby increasing the process conversion e ﬃciency . One of the possible scenarios was re- cently successfully executed involving the production of both VFAs andbiogas from urban biowastes (organic fraction of municipal solid waste and waste activated sludge) in a pilot two-stage AD process ( Valentino et al., 2019). The acidi ﬁcation reactor in the ﬁrst stage operated at 37 °C generated VFAs up to at 19.5 g COD/L without external pHcontrol. In the second stage, the solid-rich fraction collected from the acidiﬁcation reactor was converted into biogas containing 63 –64% CH 4 at a yield of up to 0.40 m3/kg VS at 37 °C. Furthermore, it was claimed that a similar scaled-up system at the mentioned temperature would be thermally sustainable leading to a surplus of thermal energy in additionto an estimated revenue stream of 609,605 €/year from electricity . Another scenario would involve the co-pro- duction of lactic acid and methane. Using organic fraction of municipal solid waste, Dreschke et al.  designed a process to produce lactic acid in batch reactors at 37 °C. Lactic acid made up to 83% of the acidcontent with a yield of up to 37 g/kg was reached after 24 h. They alsoreported 75% Lactobacilli enrichment in the microbial consortium. The eﬄuent from the batch fermenters were then co-digested with digested municipal sludge and a methane yield of up to 618 NmL CH 4/gVS was attained. In addition, the ﬁnal eﬄuent was proposed as a potential source of organic fertilizer . In addition to the production of dissolved metabolites, it has been demonstrated the AD process can be applied for biosynthesis of both hydrogen and methane. The system can be optimized to yield the se- parate products in two distinct stages to produce a mixture known as hythane, which usually contains 10– 25% hydrogen in methane ( Liu et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2011 ). In addition to the possibility of e ﬀec- tively optimizing the separate processes, the other advantages of hy- thane production, relative to the single hydrogen or methane produc- tion, include the reduced overall fermentation time and the enhanced energy recovery . For instance, Siddiqui et al.  observed that a single phase AD reactor resulted in 0.48 m3/kgVS de- stroyed methane yield, while a two-phase process produced 0.67 m3/ kgVS destroyed methane in addition to hydrogen at a yield of 0.13 m3/ kgVS destroyed. Elsewhere when pulp and paper sludge and food waste  were used, Lin et al.  demonstrated a two-stage process in which hydrogen was produced inmesophilic conditions in stage one while the digestate from this stage was subjected to thermophilic AD conversion. They reported no accu- mulation of VFAs in the ﬁrst reactor that yielded hydrogen up to 64.48 mL/gVS fedat pH levels 4.8 –6.4 while the methane yield was 432.3 mL/gVS fedat pH levels 6.5 –8.8 in the second reactor. In another research, Wang et al.  co-digested cassava stillage and excess sludge in thermophilic conditions and found a 25% higher energy yield when a two-phase fermentation system was carried instead of a one phase system. By mixing cassava stillage and excess sludge at ratio of Fig. 5. Proposed models for circular economy using anaerobic digestion technology: co-digestion using municipal, industrial and agricultural wastes , recovery of multiple products  and integration of bioprocesses .S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 10 3:1  a hydrogen yield of 74 mL/gVS fedand a methane yield of 350 mL/gVS fedwere attained. 4.3.3. Combined bioprocesses Another strategy to implement systems that potentially meets the circular economy criteria involves combination of processes that are independently optimized to recover renewable energy, chemicals and materials . Successful demonstrations of such schemes mainly comprise established industrial processes involving the production ofethanol from lignocellulosic materials as the major activity. For in- stance, wheat straw was converted into three important products: ethanol, hydrogen and biogas . The integrated bioprocess began with hydrothermal pretreatment of the wheat strawwhich resulted into cellulose-rich solid fraction and a hemicellulose- rich liquid fraction. The solid fraction was applied for ethanol fer- mentation in which a yield of up to 0.41 g/g-glucose was realized. Biogas was then produced using the e ﬄuent from the ethanol produc- tion processes yielding up to 0.324 m 3CH4/kg VS added. The liquid fraction from the straw pretreatment was separately used in dark fer- mentation reactors and yielded up to 178.0 mL H 2/g-sugars. Similarly, the eﬄuent from the hydrogen production processes was anaerobically digested to produce biogas at a yield of up to 0.381 m3CH4/kg VS added. Woody biomass has also been applied as a feedstock for production ofboth ethanol and biogas. Safari et al.  during an investigation on the performance of dilute H 2SO4pretreatment of softwood pine de- monstrated the potential improvements in the ethanol and biogas productions. Similar to the previously described work, the solid fraction from the pretreatment, consisting mostly of cellulose, was applied to produce ethanol production while the liquid fraction consisting of su- gars was applied to produce biogas. The authors reported the highest ethanol yield of 53% while the highest biogas production yield was162 m 3methane/ton of pinewood. Another key outcome from their experiments showed that the inhibitory compounds released at thepretreatments at 180 °C had more negative impact on the production of biogas compared to the production of ethanol . Another study was made by Wachendorf et al.  proposed the use of silage for production of biogas and processing of a solid fuel as a potential feed stock for combustion or gasi ﬁcation. The silage was ﬁrst subjected to hydrothermal conditioning and then mechanically dehy-drated to separate the liquid from the solid portions. The former portion was used as substrate for production of biogas while the latter portion remained as a press cake . Moreover, the digestate from the anaerobic digester could be used as fertilizer for growing more silage, making the proposed scheme highly e ﬃcient in resource recovery . In addition, a promising model that could be appropriate for agricultural wastes would be the simultaneous recovery of essential materials such as edible fungi. Nair et al.  demon- strated an integrated bioprocess in which biogas, ethanol and protein-rich fungal biomass from pretreated wheat straw. Neurospora intermedia was the species applied for producing ethanol  as well as the biomass. Further results re- vealed that compared to untreated straw, an increase of up to 162% in the methane yield would be realized from the anaerobic treatment of the liquid stream from the pretreatment process. Besides, co-digestion assays of the mentioned stream with thin stillage, a waste stream from the ethanol production process, resulted in an increase in the total energy output of up to 27% . 5. Conclusion This review paper evaluated resource recovery and circular economy options from organic solid waste using aerobic and anaerobic digestion technologies. Utilization of organic waste residues would elevate biore ﬁnery concept and social acknowledgments. Aerobic and anaerobic digestion are widely acceptable technologies to enhance theeﬃciency for energy and other high value bio-based productsproduction. Overall, various advanced models have recently been pro-posed and already worked out in line with a holistic biore ﬁnery avenue that bring enormous industrial importance. Hence, the technoeconomicexamination of these technologies is critically needed. CRediT authorship contribution statement Steven Wainaina: Dr. Steven is Investigation, and Methodology as well as write 60% part of this review article; Mukesh Kumar Awasthi: He has Conceptualization, design and Supervision of review and also writing - original draft this review article. In addition, Funding acqui- sition and Project administration; Surendra Sarsaiya: He has help to Data curation and Formal analysis; Hongyu Chen: He has help to Resources and Software, as well as write introduction and prepared Table 1; Ekta Singh: She has put some contribution to Resources and Software; Aman Kumar: He has put some contribution to Resources and Software; B. Ravindran: He has put some contribution to Validation and Visualization; Sanjeev Kumar Awasthi: He has put some contribution to data curation and Formal analysis; Tao Liu: He has put some contribution to data curation and Formal analysis; Yumin Duan: She has put some contribution to data curation and Formal analysis; Sunil Kumar: Dr. Kumar is Data curation and Formal analysis; Zengqiang Zhang: Prof. Zhang is Supervision, conceptualization and Funding acquisition; Mohammad J. Taherzadeh: Prof. Mohammad is Supervision, Validation, and Visualization, as well as very help to im- prove the manuscript quality and English. Declaration of competing interests The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂ u- ence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgments This work was supported by a research fund from the International Young Scientists from National Natural Science Foundation of China , China; the Shaanxi Introduced Talent Research Funding , China and The Introduction of Talent Research Start-up Fund , College of Natural Resources and Environment, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi Province 712100, China. The Mobility for Regional Excellence- 2020 , European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under the Marie Skł odowska- Curie grant agreement No. 754412 at University of Borås, Borås,Sweden, and Guizhou Science and Technology Corporation Platform Talents Fund, China . We are also thankful to all our laboratory colleagues and research sta ﬀ members for their constructive advice and help. References Abad, V., Avila, R., Vicent, T., Font, X., 2019. Promoting circular economy in the sur- roundings of an organic fraction of municipal solid waste anaerobic digestion treat- ment plant: biogas production impact and economic factors. Bioresour. Technol. 283, 10–17. Adani, F., Baido, D., Calcaterra, E., Genevini, P., 2002. The in ﬂuence of biomass tem- perature on biostabilization –biodrying of municipal solid waste. Bioresour. Technol. 83, 173 –179. Agnew, J.M., Leonard, J.J., 2003. The physical properties of compost. Compost Sci. Util. 1, 238 –264. Akinbomi, J., Taherzadeh, M.J., 2015. Evaluation of fermentative hydrogen production from single and mixed fruit wastes. Energies 8, 4253 –4272 . Alejandra, C., Adriana, A., Xavier, F., Raquel, B., Teresa, G., Antoni, S., 2018. Composting of food wastes: status and challenges. Bioresour. Technol. 248, 57 –67. Alves de Oliveira, R., Komesu, A., Vaz Rossell, C.E., Maciel Filho, R., 2018. Challenges and opportunities in lactic acid bioprocess design-from economic to production as-pects. Biochem. Eng. J. 133, 219 –239. Antoniou, N., Monlau, F., Sambusiti, C., Ficara, E., Barakat, A., Zabaniotou, A., 2019. Contribution to circular economy options of mixed agricultural wastes management:S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 11 coupling anaerobic digestion with gasi ﬁcation for enhanced energy and material recovery. J. Clean. Prod. 209, 505 –514. Arafat, H.A., Jijakli, K., Ahsan, A., 2013. Environmental performance and energy re- covery potential of ﬁve processes for municipal solid waste treatment. J. Clean. Prod. 105, 233 –240. Argun, H., Dao, S., 2017. Bio-hydrogen production from waste peach pulp by dark fer- mentation: e ﬀect of inoculum addition. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 42, 2569 –2574 . Arslan, D., Zhang, Y., Steinbusch, K.J.J., Diels, L., Hamelers, H.V.M., Buisman, C.J.N., De Wever, H., 2017. In-situ carboxylate recovery and simultaneous ph control with tailor-con ﬁgured bipolar membrane electro dialysis during continuous mixed culture fermentation. Sep. Purif. Technol. 175, 27 –35. Aryal, N., Kvist, T., Ammam, F., Pant, D., Ottosen, L.D.M., 2018. An overview of microbial biogas enrichment. Bioresour. Technol. 264, 359 –369. Atasoy, M., Owusu-Agyeman, I., Plaza, E., Cetecioglu, Z., 2018. Bio-based volatile fatty acid production and recovery from waste streams: current status and future chal- lenges. Bioresour. Technol. 268, 773 –786. Awasthi, M.K., Liu, T., Chen, H., Verma, S., Duan, Y., Awasthi, S.K., Wang, Q., Ren, X., Zhao, J., Zhang, Z., 2019a. The behavior of antibiotic resistance genes and their associations with bacterial community during poultry manure composting. Bioresour.Technol. 280, 70 –78. Awasthi, M.K., Mahar, A., Ali, A., Wang, Q., Zhang, Z., 2017. Component technologies for municipal solid waste management. CRC Press. 178, 53 –88. Awasthi, M.K., Sarsaiya, S., Wainaina, S., Rajendran, K., Kumar, S., Quan, W., Duan, Y., Awasthi, S.K., Chen, H., Pandey, A., Zhang, Z., Jain, A., Taherzadeh, M.J., 2019b. Acritical review of organic manure biore ﬁnery models toward sustainable circular bioeconomy: technological challenges, advancements, innovations, and future per-spectives. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 111, 115 –131. Awasthi, M.K., Wang, Q., Awasthi, S.K., Wang, M., Chen, H., Ren, X., Zhao, J., Zhang, Z., 2018. In ﬂuence of medical stone amendment on gaseous emissions, microbial bio- mass and abundance of ammonia oxidizing bacteria genes during biosolids com-posting. Bioresour. Technol. 247, 970 –979. Bauer, F., Persson, T., Hulteberg, C., Tamm, D., 2013. Biogas upgrading –technology overview, comparison and perspectives for the future. Biofuel. Bioprod. Bior. 7,499 –511. Bernal, M., Navarro, A., Roig, A., Cegarra, J., García, D., 1996. Carbon and nitrogen transformation during composting of sweet sorghum bagasse. Biol. Fert. Soils 22, 141 –148. Bhatia, S.K., Joo, H.S., Yang, Y.H., 2018. Biowaste-to-bioenergy using biological methods - A mini-review. Energ. Convers. Manage. 177, 640 –660. Bhattacharyya, J.K., Kumar, S., Devotta, S., 2008. Studies on acidiﬁ cation in two-phase biomethanation process of municipal solid waste. Waste Manage. 28, 164 –169. Biswabandhu, C., Debabrata, M., 2019. Role of stage-separation in the ubiquitous de- velopment of Anaerobic Digestion of Organic Fraction of Municipal Solid Waste: acritical review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 104, 439 –469. Bonk, F., Bastidas-Oyanedel, J.R., Yousef, A.F., Schmidt, J.E., 2017. Exploring the se- lective lactic acid production from food waste in uncontrolled ph mixed culture fermentations using di ﬀerent reactor conﬁ gurations. Bioresour. Technol. 238, 416 –424. Brandli, R.C., Bucheli, T.D., Kupper, T., Mayer, J., Stadelmann, F.X., Tarradellas, J., 2007. Fate of PCBs, PAHs and their source characteristic ratios during composting and di- gestion of source-separated organic waste in full-scale plants. Environ. Pollut. 148, 520 –528. Cabrera, F., Serrano, A., Torres, Á., Rodriguez-Gutierrez, G., Jeison, D., Fermoso, F.G., 2019. The accumulation of volatile fatty acids and phenols through a ph-controlledfermentation of olive mill solid waste. Sci. Total Environ. 657, 1501 –1507 . Cáceres, R., Coromina, N., Maliń ska, K., Marfà, O., 2015. Evolution of process control parameters during extended co-composting of green waste and solid fraction of cattle slurry to obtain growing media. Bioresour. Technol. 179, 396 –406. Capson-Tojo, G., Trably, E., Rouez, M., Crest, M., Steyer, J.-P., Delgenès, J.P., Escudié, R., 2017. Dry anaerobic digestion of food waste and cardboard at di ﬀerent substrate loads, solid contents and co-digestion proportions. Bioresour. Technol. 233, 166 –175. Carlini, M., Mosconi, E., Castellucci, S., Villarini, M., Colantoni, A., 2017. An economical evaluation of anaerobic digestion plants fed with organic agro-industrial waste. Energies. 10, 1165 . Chen, Y., Jiang, S., Yuan, H., Zhou, Q., Gu, G., 2007. Hydrolysis and acidiﬁ cation of waste activated sludge at di ﬀerent pHs. Water Res. 41, 683 –689. Chojnacka, K., Gorazda, K., Witek-Krowiak, A., Moustakas, K., 2019. Recovery of ferti- lizer nutrients from materials - Contradictions, mistakes and future trends. Renew.Sustain Energy Rev. 110, 485 –498. Daniel, H., Perinaz, B.T., 2012. What a Waste: a Global Review of Solid Waste Management. World Bank . Das, K., Keener, H.M., 1996. Dynamic simulation model as a tool for managing a large scale composting system. ASAE 6th Int. Computers in Agriculture, Cancum, Mexico . Davis, M.L., Cornwell, A.D., 2008. Introduction to Environmental Engineering, fourth ed. McGraw Hill . Dreschke, G., Probst, M., Walter, A., Pümpel, T., Walde, J., Insam, H., 2015. Lactic acid and methane: improved exploitation of biowaste potential. Bioresour. Technol. 176, 47–55. Ecofys, 2018. Gas for Climate. How gas can help to achieve the Paris Agreement target in an aﬀordable way. https://www.gasforclimate2050.eu/ ﬁles/ﬁles/Ecofys_Gas_for_ Climate_Feb2018.pdf . . Ezzariai, A., Mohamed, H., Ahmed, K., Quentin, A., Loubna, E.F., Maialen, B., Georges, M., Dominique, P., Eric, P., 2018. Human and veterinary antibiotics during com-posting of sludge or manure: global perspectives on persistence, degradation, andresistance genes. J. Hazard. Mater. 359, 465 –481. Fang, H.H.P., Liu, H., 2002. E ﬀect of ph on hydrogen production from glucose by a mixedculture. Bioresour. Technol. 82, 87 –93. Felix, M., Ramchandra, B., Stefan, G., 2019. Critical review on life cycle assessment of conventional and innovative waste-to-energy technologies. Sci. Total Environ. 672, 708 –721. Forough, M., Keikhosro, K., Mohammad, J.T., 2019. Energy recovery from industrial crop wastes by dry anaerobic digestion: a review. Ind. Crop. Prod. 129, 673 –687. Frosch, D., Gallopoulos, N., 1989. Strategies for manufacturing. Sci. Am. 261, 144 –1102 . Gajalakshmi, S., Abbasi, S.A., 2008. Solid waste management by composting: state of the art. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 38, 311 –400. Garcia-Aguirre, J., Aymerich, E., González-Mtnez, deGoñi J., Esteban-Gutiérrez, M., 2017. Selective VFA production potential from organic waste streams: assessing tempera- ture and pH in ﬂuence. Bioresour. Technol. 244, 1081 –1088 . Gestore Servizi Energetici , 2015. Incentivazione Delle Fonti Rinnovabili. Available online: http://www.gse.it/it/Dati%20e%20Bilanci/GSE_Documenti/Bollettino %20informativo Bollettino% 202%20semestre%202015.pdf . (accessed on 3 May 2017). González-García, S., Rama, M., Cortés, A., García-Guaita, F., Núñez, A., Louro, L., Moreira, M., Feijoo, G., 2019. Embedding environmental, economic and social in-dicators in the evaluation of the sustainability of the municipalities of Galicia. J. Clean. Prod. 234, 27 –42. Gu, X.Y., Liu, J.Z., Wong, J.W.C., 2018. Control of lactic acid production during hydro- lysis and acidogenesis of food waste. Bioresour. Technol. 247, 711 –715. Han, W., Huang, J., Zhao, H., Li, Y., 2016. Continuous biohydrogen production from waste bread by anaerobic sludge. Bioresour. Technol. 212, 1 –5. Haug, R.T., 1993. The Practical Handbook of Compost Engineering. Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, FL . Henze, M., Mark, C.M., van Loosdrecht, M.C., Ekama, G.A., 2008. Biological Wastewater Treatment, ﬁrst ed. IWA Publisher, London, UK . HK Policy Address. 2017. https://www.policyaddress.gov.hk/2017/eng/pdf/PA2017. pdf. . Houot, S., Verge-Leviel, C., Poitrenaud, M., 2012. Potential mineralization of various organic pollutants during composting. Pedosphere. 22, 536 –543. International Energy Agency, 2015. http://task37.ieabioenergy.com/plant-list.html . International Standard Organization, 2006. ISO 14040: Environmental Management- Life Cycle Assessment-Principles and Framework. Isar, J., Agarwal, L., Saran, S., Saxena, R.K., 2006. A statistical method for enhancing the production of succinic acid from escherichia coli under anaerobic conditions.Bioresour. Technol. 97, 1443 –1448 . Jain, M.S., Paul, S., Kalamdhad, A.S., 2019. Interplay of physical and chemical properties during in-vessel degradation of sewage sludge. Waste Manage. 98, 58 –68. Jeong, K.H., Kim, J.K., Ravindran, B., Lee, D.J., Wong, J.W.C., Selvam, A., Karthikeyan, O.P., Kwag, J.H., 2017. Evaluation of pilot-scale in-vessel composting for Hanwoomanure. Bioresour. Technol. 245, 20 –206. Kaparaju, P., Serrano, M., Thomsen, A.B., Kongjan, P., Angelidaki, I., 2009. Bioethanol, biohydrogen and biogas production from wheat straw in a biore ﬁnery concept. Bioresour. Technol. 100, 2562 –2568 . Kapdan, I.K., Kargi, F., 2006. Bio-hydrogen production from waste materials. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 38, 569 –582. Kapoor, R., Ghosh, P., Kumar, M., Vijay, V.K., 2019. Evaluation of biogas upgrading technologies and future perspectives: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. R 26, 11631 –11661. Kaur, G., Luo, L., Chen, G., Wong, J.W.C., 2019. Integrated food waste and sewage treatment –A better approach than conventional food waste-sludge co-digestion for higher energy recovery via anaerobic digestion. Bioresour. Technol. 289, 121698 . Kavitha, S., Banu, J.R., Priya, A.A., Uan, D.K., Yeom, I.T., 2017. Liquefaction of food waste and its impacts on anaerobic biodegradability, energy ratio and economic feasibility. Appl. Energy 208, 228 –238. Keener, H.M., Dick, W.A., Hoitink, H.A.J., 2000. Composting and bene ﬁcial utilization of composted by-product materials. In: Dick, W.A., , Land Application of Agricultural, Industrial, and Municipal By-Products. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. pp. 315-341. Keskin, T., Arslan, K., Nalakth Abubackar, H., Vural, C., Eroglu, D., Karaalp, D., Yanik, J., Ozdemir, G., Azbar, N., 2018. Determining the e ﬀect of trace elements on biohy- drogen production from fruit and vegetable wastes. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43, 10666 –10677. Kim, J.K., Lee, D.J., Ravindran, B., Jeong, K.H., Wong, J.W.C., Selvam, A., Karthikeyan, O.P., Kwag, J.H., 2017. Evaluation of integrated ammonia recovery technology andnutrient status with an in-vessel composting process for swine manure. Bioresour. Technol. 245, 365 –371. Kiros, H., Zong, J.P., Li, D.X., Liu, C., Lu, X.H., 2017. Anaerobic co-digestion process for biogas production: progress, challenges and perspectives. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 76, 1485 –1496 . Koushki, P., Al-Duaij, U., Al-Ghimlas, W., 2004. Collection and transportation cost of household solid waste in Kuwait. Waste Manage. 24, 957 –964. Kumar, S., 2017. Municipal solid waste management in developing countries. CRC press 178 -42B/W illustrations ISBN 978498737746-CAT# K26553. Li, R., Wang, J.J., Zhang, Z., Shen, F., Zhang, G., Qin, R., Li, X., Xiao, R., 2012. Nutrient transformations during composting of pig manure with bentonite. Bioresour. Technol. 121 , 362 –368. Lim, S.J., Kim, B.J., Jeong, C.M., Choi, J.D., Ahn, Y.H., Chang, H.N., 2008. Anaerobic organic acid production of food waste in once-a-day feeding and drawing-o ﬀbior- eactor. Bioresour. Technol. 99, 7866 –7874 . Lin, Y., Wu, S., Wang, D., 2013. Hydrogen-methane production from pulp & paper sludge and food waste by mesophilic –thermophilic anaerobic co-digestion. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 38, 15055 –15062. Liu, Z., Zhang, C., Lu, Y., Wu, X., Wang, L., Wang, L., Han, B., Xing, X.H., 2013. States and challenges for high-value biohythane production from waste biomass by darkS. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 12 fermentation technology. Bioresour. Technol. 135, 292 –303. Luis, A.B.P., Barbara, S.B., Rafael, M.D., Daniel, J., Rosane, A.G.B., 2019. Organic solid waste management in a circular economy perspective - A systematic review and SWOT analysis. J. Clean. Prod. 239, 118086 . Malinowski, M., Wolny-Ko ładka, K., Vaverková, M.D., 2019. E ﬀect of biochar addition on the OFMSW composting process under real conditions. Waste Manage. 84, 364 –372. Mandpe, A., Paliya, S., Kumar, S., Kumar, R., 2019. Fly ash as an additive for enhancing microbial and enzymatic activities in in-vessel composting of organic wastes.Bioresour. Technol. 293, 122047 . Merlin Christy, P., Gopinath, L.R., Divya, D., 2014. A review on anaerobic decomposition and enhancement of biogas production through enzymes and microorganisms. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 34, 167 –173. Micolucci, F., Gottardo, M., Cavinato, C., Pavan, P., Bolzonella, D., 2016. Mesophilic and thermophilic anaerobic digestion of the liquid fraction of pressed biowaste for highenergy yields recovery. Waste Manage. 48, 227 –235. Mohan, S.V., Nikhil, G.N., Chiranjeevi, P., Reddy, C.N., Rohit, M.V., Kumar, A.N., Sarkar, O., 2016. Waste biore ﬁnery models towards sustainable circular bioeconomy: critical review and future perspectives. Bioresour. Technol. 215, 2 –12. Munawar, K., Mohammed, A.B., Rudi, H., Akhmad, R., 2019. Waste to energy technology: the potential of sustainable biogas production from animal waste in Indonesia. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 105, 323 –331. Munir, M.T., Mansouri, S.S., Udugama, I.A., Baroutian, S., Gernaey, K.V., Young, B.R., 2018. Resource recovery from organic solid waste using hydrothermal processing: opportunities and challenges. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 96, 64 –75. Murthy, G.S., 2016. Techno-economic assessment. In: Li, Y., Khanal, S.K. , Bioenergy: Principles and Applications. Wiley-Blackwell, New Jersey, USA, pp.507 –520. Nair, R.B., Kabir, M.M., Lennartsson, P.R., Taherzadeh, M.J., Horváth, I.S., 2018. Integrated process for ethanol, biogas, and edible ﬁlamentous fungi-based animal feed production from dilute phosphoric acid-pretreated wheat straw. Appl. Biochem.Biotech. 184, 48 –62. Nuhaa, S., 2019. Insight into the recovery of nutrients from organic solid waste through biochemical conversion processes for fertilizer production: a review. J. Clean. Prod.,118413 . Nurul, I.S., Zularisam, A.W., 2018. Achievements and perspectives of anaerobic co-di- gestion: a review. J. Clean. Prod. 194, 359 –371. Olsson, L., Fallde, M., 2015. Waste  potential: a socio-technical analysis of biogas production and use in Sweden. J. Clean. Prod. 98, 107 –115. PagésDíaz, J., Pereda Reyes, I., Lundin, M., SárváriHorváth, I., 2011. Co-digestion of diﬀerent waste mixtures from agro-industrial activities: kinetic evaluation and sy- nergetic e ﬀects. Bioresour. Technol. 102, 10834 –10840 . Panichnumsin, P., Nopharatana, A., Ahring, B., Chaiprasert, P., 2010. Production of methane by co-digestion of cassava pulp with various concentrations of pig manure.Biomass. Bioenergy 34, 1117 –1124 . Patinvoh, R.J., Lundin, M., Taherzadeh, M.J., SárváriHorváth, I., 2018. Dry anaerobic co- digestion of citrus wastes with keratin and lignocellulosic wastes: batch and con- tinuous processes. Waste Biomass. Valori. 1 –12. Phanthumchinda, N., Thitiprasert, S., Tanasupawat, S., Assabumrungrat, S., Thongchul, N., 2018. Process and cost modeling of lactic acid recovery from fermentation brothsby membrane-based process. Process Biochem. 68, 205 –213. Polprasert, C., 2007. Organic Waste Recycling Technology and Management, third ed. IWA, London, UK . Pooja, Y., Samadder, S.R., 2018. A critical review of the life cycle assessment studies on solid waste management in Asian countries. J. Clean. Prod. 185, 492 –515. Probst, M., Walde, J., Pümpel, T., Wagner, A.O., Insam, H., 2015. A closed loop for municipal organic solid waste by lactic acid fermentation. Bioresour. Technol. 175,142 –151. Rajendran, K., Murthy, G.S., 2019. Techno-economic and life cycle assessments of anaerobic digestion –A review. Biocat. Agric. Biotechnol. 20, 101207 . Ravindran, B., Contreras-Ramos, S.M., Wong, J.W.C., Selvam, A., Sekaran, G., 2014. Nutrient and enzymatic changes of hydrolysed tannery solid waste treated withepigeic earthworm. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 21, 641 –651. Ravindran, B., Nguyen, D.D., Chaudhary, D.K., Chang, S.W., Kim, J., Lee, S.R., Shin, J., Jeon, B., Chung, S., Lee, J., 2019. In ﬂuence of biochar on physico-chemical and microbial community during swine manure composting process. J. Environ. Manage. 232, 592 –599. Ravindran, B., Sekaran, G., 2010. Bacterial composting of animal ﬂeshing generated from tannery industries. Waste. Manage. 30, 2622 –2630 . Ren, N., Guo, W., Liu, B., Cao, G., Ding, J., 2011. Biological hydrogen production by dark fermentation: challenges and prospects towards scaled-up production. Curr. Opin. Biotech. 22, 365 –370. Ren, Y., Yu, M., Wu, C., Wang, Q., Gao, M., Huang, Q., Liu, Y., 2018. A comprehensive review on food waste anaerobic digestion: research updates and tendencies.Bioresour. Technol. 1069 –1076 . Richard, T.L., Hamelers, H.V.M., Veeken, A.H.M., Silva, T., 2002. Moisture relationships in composting processes. Compost. Sci. Util. 10, 286 –302. Rusmanis, D., O ’Shea, R., Wall, D.M., Murphy, J.D., 2019. Biological hydrogen metha- nation systems –an overview of design and e ﬃciency. Bioengineered 10 , 604 –634. Safari, A., Karimi, K., Sha ﬁei, M., 2016. Integrated ethanol and biogas production from pinewood. RSC Adv. 6, 36441 –36449 . Sarsaiya, S., Awasthi, S.K., Awasthi, M.K., Awasthi, A.K., Mishra, S., Chen, J., 2018. The dynamic of cellulase activity of fungi inhabiting organic municipal solid waste. Bioresour. Technol. 251, 411 –415. Sarsaiya, S., Jain, A., Kumar Awasthi, S., Duan, Y., Kumar Awasthi, M., Shi, J., 2019a. Microbial dynamics for lignocellulosic waste bioconversion and its importance withmodern circular economy, challenges and future perspectives. Bioresour. Technol. 291, 121905 . Sarsaiya, S., Jia, Q., Fan, X., Jain, A., Shu, F., Lu, Y., Shi, J., Chen, J., 2019b. First report of leaf black circular spots on Dendrobiumnobile caused by Trichodermalongibrachiatum in Guizhou Province, China. Plant Dis. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-03-19-0672-PDN . Sarsaiya, S., Shi, J., Chen, J., 2019c. A comprehensive review on fungal endophytes and its dynamics on Orchidaceae plants: current research, challenges, and future possi- bilities. Bioengineered 10, 316 –334. Schmidt, T.S., 2014. Low-carbon investment risks and de-risking. Nat. Clim. Change 4, 237 –239. Shin, H.S., Youn, J.H., Kim, S.H., 2004. Hydrogen production from food waste in anae- robic mesophilic and thermophilic acidogenesis. Int. J. Hydrogen. Energy 29, 1355 –1363 . Siddiqui, Z., Horan, N.J., Salter, M., 2011. Energy optimization from co-digested waste using a two-phase process to generate hydrogen and methane. Int. J. Hydrogen. Energy 36, 4792 –4799 . Silva, R.V., Brito, J.D., Lynn, C.J., Dhirb, R.K., 2019. Environmental impacts of the use of bottom ashes from municipal solid waste incineration: a review. Resour. Conserv. Recycle 140, 23 –35. Singh, J., Kalamdhad, A.S., 2014. Potential for composting of green phumdi biomass of Loktaklake. Ecol. Eng. 67, 119 –126. Soobhany, N., 2019. Insight into the recovery of nutrients from organic solid waste through biochemical conversion processes for fertilizer production: a review. J.Clean. Prod. 241, 118413 . Source: Statistics Explained –17/ 12/2019. Stiles, W.A., Styles, D., Chapman, S.P., Esteves, S., Bywater, A., Melville, L., Silkina, A., Lupatsh, I., Grunewald, C.F., Lovitt, R., Chaloner, T., Bull, A., Morris, C., Liewellyn,C.A., 2018. Using microalgae in the circular economy to valorise anaerobic digestate: challenges and opportunities. Bioresour. Technol. 267, 732 –742. Sun, Z., Li, M., Qi, Q., Gao, C., Lin, C.S.K., 2014. Mixed food waste as renewable feedstock in succinic acid fermentation. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 174, 1822 –1833 . Taherzadeh, M.J., Karimi, K., 2008. Pretreatment of lignocellulosic wastes to improve ethanol and biogas production: a review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 9, 1621 –1651 . Tang, Z., Yu, G., Liu, D., Xu, D., Shen, Q., 2011. Di ﬀerent analysis techniques for ﬂuor- escence excitation-emission matrix spectroscopy to assess compost maturity. Chemosphere 82, 1202 –1208 . Tchobanoglous, G., Burton, F.L., Stensel, H.D., 2004. Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and Reuse, fourth ed. McGraw Hill, New York, NY, USA . Tehrani, S.M., Karbassi, A.R., Ghoddosi, J., Monavvari, S.M., Mirbagheri, S.A., 2009. Prediction of energy consumption and urban air pollution reduction in e-shoppingadoption. Int. J. Food. Agri. Environ. 7, 898 –903. Thiriet, P., Bioteau, T., Tremier, A., 2020... Optimization method to construct micro- anaerobic digesters networks for decentralized biowaste treatment in urban and peri- urban areas. J. Clean. Prod. 243, 118478 . Torquati, B., Venanzi, S., Ciani, A., Diotallevi, F., Tamburi, V., 2014. Environmental sustainability and economic bene ﬁts of dairy farm biogas energy production: a case study in Umbria. Sustainability. 6, 6696 –6713 . Trad, Z., Akimbomi, J., Vial, C., Larroche, C., Taherzadeh, M.J., Fontaine, J.P., 2015. Development of a submerged anaerobic membrane bioreactor for concurrent ex- traction of volatile fatty acids and biohydrogen production. Bioresour. Technol. 196, 290 –300. Turhal, S., Turanbaev, M., Argun, H., 2019. Hydrogen production from melon and wa- termelon mixture by dark fermentation. Int. J. Hydrogen. Energy 44, 18811 –18817 . Valentino, F., Gottardo, M., Micolucci, F., Pavan, P., Bolzonella, D., Rossetti, S., Majone, M., 2018. Organic fraction of municipal solid waste recovery by conversion intoadded-value polyhydroxyalkanoates and biogas. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6, 16375 –16385. Valentino, F., Moretto, G., Gottardo, M., Pavan, P., Bolzonella, D., Majone, M., 2019. Novel routes for urban bio-waste management: a combined acidic fermentation andanaerobic digestion process for platform chemicals and biogas production. J. Clean. Prod. 220, 368 –375. Vinay, K.T., Fdez-Güelfo, L.A., Zhou, Y., Álvarez-Gallego, C.J., Romero, L.I.G., Wun, J.N., 2018. Anaerobic co-digestion of organic fraction of municipal solid waste : progress and challenges. Renew. Sustain Energy Rev. 93, 380 –399. Wachendorf, M., Richter, F., Fricke, T., Graß, R., Ne ﬀ, R., 2009. Utilization of semi- natural grassland through integrated generation of solid fuel and biogas from bio-mass. I. E ﬀects of hydrothermal conditioning and mechanical dehydration on mass ﬂows of organic and mineral plant compounds, and nutrient balances. Grass Forage Sci. 64, 132 –143. Wainaina, S., Lukitawesa, Awasthi, M.K., Taherzadeh, M.J., 2019a. Bioengineering of anaerobic digestion for volatile fatty acids, hydrogen or methane production: a cri-tical review. Bioengineered 10, 437 –458. Wainaina, S., Parchami, M., Mahboubi, A., Horváth, I.S., Taherzadeh, M.J., 2019b. Food waste-derived volatile fatty acids platform using an immersed membrane bioreactor. Bioresour. Technol. 274, 329 –334. Wang, J., Wan, W., 2008. E ﬀect of temperature on fermentative hydrogen production by mixed cultures. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 33, 5392 –5397 . Wang, J., Wan, W., 2009. Factors in ﬂuencing fermentative hydrogen production: a re- view. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 34, 799 –811. Wang, K., Li, W., Li, X., Ren, N., 2015. Spatial nitriﬁ cations of microbial processes during composting of swine, cow and chicken manure. Sci. Rep. 5 . Wang, W., Xie, L., Chen, J., Luo, G., Zhou, Q., 2011. Biohydrogen and methane pro- duction by co-digestion of cassava stillage and excess sludge under thermophilic condition. Bioresour. Technol. 102, 3833 –3839 . Waste Management World, 2017. Report: Global Biogas Market to Reach $50 Billion byS. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 13 2026. https://waste-management-world.com/ . WBA, 2017. https://worldbioenergy.org/uploads/WBA%20GBS%202017_hq.pdf . . Wei, Y.M., Li, J.Y., Shi, D.Z., Liu, G.T., Zhao, C.Y., Takayuki, S., 2017. Environmental challenges impeding the composting of biodegradable municipal solid waste: a cri- tical review. Resour. Conserv. Recycle 122, 51 –65. Weiland, P., 2010. Biogas production: current state and perspectives. Appl. Microbiol. Biot. 85, 849 –860. Wongthanate, J., Mongkarothai, K., 2018. Enhanced thermophilic bioenergy production from food waste by a two-stage fermentation process. Int. J. Recycl. Organic WasteAgric. 7, 109 –116. Wu, X., Wei, Y., Zheng, J., Zhao, X., Zhong, W., 2011. The behavior of tetracyclines and their degradation products during swine manure composting. Bioresour. Technol.102, 5924 –5931 . Xiong, Z., Hussain, A., Lee, J., Lee, H.S., 2019. Food waste fermentation in a leach bed reactor: reactor performance, and microbial ecology and dynamics. Bioresour. Technol. 274, 153 –161. Yang, C., He, X.S., Gao, R.T., Xi, B.D., Huang, C.H., Zhang, H., Tan, W., Li, D., 2017. E ﬀect of compositional and structural evolution of size fractionated dissolved organicmatter on electron transfer capacity during composting. Chin. J. Anal. Chem. 45, 579 –586. Yang, W., Zhuo, Q., Chen, Q., Chen, Z., 2019. E ﬀect of iron nanoparticles on passivation of cadmium in the pig manure aerobic composting process. Sci. Total Environ. 690, 900 –910. Yentekakis, I.V., Goula, G., 2017. Biogas management: advanced utilization for produc- tion of renewable energy and added-value chemicals. Front. Environ. Sci. 5 . Zhang, C., Xiao, G., Peng, L., Su, H., Tan, T., 2013. The anaerobic co-digestion of foodwaste and cattle manure. Bioresour. Technol. 129, 170 –176. Zhang, F., Chen, Y., Dai, K., Shen, N., Zeng, R.J., 2015. The glucose metabolic distribution in thermophilic  mixed culture fermentation: a chemostat study. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 40, 919 –926. Zhang, L., Kai-Chee, L., Zhang, J.X., 2019. Enhanced biogas production from anaerobic digestion of solid organic wastes: current status and prospects. Bioresour. Technol. Rep. 5, 280 –296. Zhao, P., Shen, Y., Ge, S., Chen, Z., Yoshikawa, K., 2014. Clean solid biofuel production from high moisture content waste biomass employing hydrothermal treatment. Appl.Energy 131, 345 –367. Zhen, G., Pan, Y., Lu, X., Li, Y.Y., Zhang, Z., Niu, C., Kumar, G., Kobayashi, T., Zhao, Y., Xu, K., 2019. Anaerobic membrane bioreactor towards biowaste biore ﬁnery and chemical energy harvest: recent progress, membrane fouling and future perspectives. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 115, 109392 . Zhou, A., Guo, Z., Yang, C., Kong, F., Liu, W., Wang, A., 2013a. Volatile fatty acids productivity by anaerobic co-digesting waste activated sludge and corn straw: e ﬀect of feedstock proportion. J. Biotechnol. 168, 234 –239. Zhou, H., Meng, A., Long, Y., Li, Q., Zhang, Y., 2014. An overview of characteristics of municipal solid waste fuel in China: physical, chemical composition and heating value. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 36, 107 –122. Zhou, M., Yan, B., Wong, J.W.C., Zhang, Y., 2018. Enhanced volatile fatty acids pro- duction from anaerobic fermentation of food waste: a mini-review focusing on acidogenic metabolic pathways. Bioresour. Technol. 248, 68 –78. Zhou, P., Elbeshbishy, E., Nakhla, G., 2013b. Optimization of biological hydrogen pro- duction for anaerobic co-digestion of food waste and waste water biosolids.Bioresour. Technol. 130, 710 –718.S. Wainaina, et al. Bioresource Technology 301  122778 14 

