Waste Management in Small and Medium Enterprises : Compliance with Duty of Care and implications for the CircularEconomy Ryan Woodard School of Environment &Technology, University of Brighton, Brighton, UK article info Article history: Received 16 November 2018Received in revised form13 August 2020 Accepted 14 August 2020 Available online 22 August 2020 Handling Editor: Cecilia Maria Villas B ^oas de Almeida Keywords: Commercial &industrial waste Circular economySMEs Waste policy Recyclingabstract It is estimated 30.8 million tonnes of waste is generated by Small and Medium Enterprises  in England, more than is generated by households. Despite this there is surprisingly limited research na- tionally and internationally on the management of waste from SMEs. In England businesses have a Dutyof Care to ensure that their waste is managed in a responsible way and it is illegal for them to household waste services. This paper presents the results from semi-structured interviews and site visits with 100 SMEs to assess levels of compliance with Duty of Care. It also presents the results of analysing 3.8 tonnesof household waste to identify levels of waste from SMEs illegally entering the household stream. Theauthor believes this is the ﬁrst study which attempts to estimate levels of business waste abuse of household services through undertaking waste composition analysis. With policy makers increasingly focusing on the Circular Economy the research is the ﬁrst to estimate levels of resource leakage of recyclable and biowaste from SMEs into the household waste stream. 25% of SMEs interviewed were found to be illegally using household services for their waste, and 38% for their recycling. Waste composition analysis of household waste found that 6% of the waste sampled was from SMEs and that77% of this waste was biowaste or dry recyclable materials that could have been diverted from disposal through recycling programmes. The paper considers the implications of these ﬁndings and presents recommendations to improve the management of the SME waste stream. ©2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Whilst there is a signi ﬁcant body of research into the manage- ment of household waste there is surprisingly limited research into the management of commercial and industrial waste (hereafter referred to as C &I or business waste) both in England and world- wide. The de ﬁnition of C &I waste in England is set out in section 75 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990  and is all waste generated by commerce and industry. Table 1 provides a summary of the C &I waste de ﬁnition and a breakdown of waste arisings. Whilst England has the Waste Data Flow system which requires local authorities to return data to government on the quantities and management of household waste, no such system exists for C &I waste leading to uncertainties in arisings and data gaps. Improving the quality of C &I data has been identi ﬁed a pri- ority by the government . The latest government estimate is that 37.9 million tonnes of C &I was waste generated in 2017 far exceeding the 22.4 million tonnes produced from households ( Department for Environment, 2019 ). Whilst establishing effective systems for managing C &I waste is pivotal in our attempts to meet the principles of a Circular Econ- omy, the waste stream has historically been overlooked in both national and European waste policy. This was acknowledged in the government ’s 2011 Review of Waste Policy where the government stated it would be taking steps to improve the waste and recycling services to businesses, especially Small and Medium Enterprises  ( Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011a ). This commitment to support SMEs was reinforced in the government ’s most recent strategy ‘Our Waste, Our Resources ’published in 2018 ( Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2018 ). The European Commission de ﬁnes SMEs as businesses with less than 250 employees or have a turnover of less than V50 million (see Table 2 ). Globally SMEs represent 90% of businesses and more than E-mail address: rw95@brighton.ac.uk . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Cleaner Production journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123770 0959-6526/ ©2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 50% of employment . Across the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development   almost one person out of three is employed in a micro ﬁrm with less than 10 employees, and two out of three in an SME. In many countries SMEs contribute more than 50% of GDP ( International Labour Organization, 2020 ). At the start of 2018 SMEs accounted for 99.9% of all private sector businesses, 59.2% of private sector employment and 51.0% of private sector turnover in England(Department for Business, Energy &Industrial Strategy and Of ﬁce for National Statistics  . As such SMEs have a vital role to play in the economy, employment, environmental protection and resource ﬂows. The most recent data providing a breakdown on the levels of C&I waste based on businesses size was published in 2011 (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2011 )esubsequent government studies do not show this detail. Data shows that 64.3% of the total C&I waste generated in England originated from SMEs with 12.3% generated by businesses with less than 10 employees . Historically there has been a focus on the environmental impact of large business but due to economic, social and legislative drivers, larger businesses, in general, have well established waste man- agement systems. For many SMEs this is not the case. In England Duty of Care legislation sets out the responsibility of businesses towards managing the waste they generate. The legis- lation aims to ensure that the waste generated does not cause harm to the environment and human health. Under Duty of Care busi- nesses must ensure the waste they produce is managed in a responsible way and it is illegal for businesses to place waste they generate in services for household waste. In other countries similar legislation exists. For example in the USA and Australia it is com- mon for conditions on the use of bins and storage of waste to be set out in ordinances eseeCity and County of Denver, Colorado  Code of Ordinances Chapter 48 Waste Management , and the City of Sydney  Waste Policy Local Approvals Policy For Managing Waste In Public Places . Despite the levels of waste generated frombusinesses there are surprisingly few journal papers on the man- agement of C &I waste and compliance with Duty of Care regula- tions or similar regulations in other jurisdictions. 2. Aim and contribution to knowledge This paper presents the results of research conducted in Brigh- ton and Hove City on the south coast of England focusing on the management of waste in SMEs and compliance with Duty of Care regulations. The aims were to  build on existing literature to understand how SMEs are currently managing their waste  to understand levels of compliance with the Duty of Care regulations  through waste composition analysis estimate levels of C &I waste illegally entering the household waste stream  consider the implications of current practice and make recommendations. The research contributes to the limited knowledge of how businesses are currently managing their waste and levels of compliance with Duty of Care regulations. In addition to collating data from 100 SMEs through semi-structured interviews, it is the ﬁrst study that the author is aware of which attempts to estimate levels of business waste abuse of household services through un- dertaking waste composition analysis. With global policy makers increasingly focusing on the Circular Economy the research is the ﬁrst study to estimate levels of resource leakage of recyclable and biowaste from SMEs entering the residual household stream thatshould be managed more appropriately. The study presents in- dicators to identify C &I waste entering the household waste stream which could assist researchers undertaking similar research and highlights a range of implications associated with non-compliance with Duty of Care. Given the levels of waste generated, improvedresource recovery in SMEs could have a signi ﬁcant environmental, economic and social bene ﬁts. The legal framework and system for managing C &I waste in England is presented followed by a review of literature on compliance with Duty of Care. The methods adopted are presented followed by the results, discussion and conclusion.Table 1 Deﬁnition, arisings and management of Commercial and Industrial Waste in England . (Adapted from Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs &Government Statistical Service, 2019a ;Great Britain, 1990 ). Waste streamDeﬁnition Tonnes generated 2017  Commercial Waste from: premises  used wholly or mainly for the purposes of a trade or business or the purposes of sport, recreation or entertainment excluding household waste or industrial waste.27.1 Industrial Waste from: - any factory; - any premises used for the purposes of, or in connection with, the provision to the public of transport services by land, water or air; - any premises used for the purposes of, or in connection with, the supply to the public of gas, water or electricity or the provision of sewerage services; - any premises used for the purposes of, or in connection with, the provision to the public of postal or telecommunications services; or any mine or quarry. >10.8 Table 2 Deﬁnition and waste generation by businesses in England . (Adapted from Department for Business, Energy &Industrial Strategy and Of ﬁce for National Statistics, 2018 ; Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2011 ;ECORYS, 2012 andEuropean Commission, 2005 ). Category Number of employeesTurnover % of enterprises in EU% of enterprises in EnglandWeight of waste (million tonnes)% of Total C &I waste Micro 1 to 9 /C20V2 million 92.2 95.7 5.9 12.3 Small 10 to 49 /C20V10 million or balance sheet total /C20V10 million6.5 3.6 10.7 22.4 Medium 50 to 249 /C20V50 million or balance sheet total /C20V43million1.1 0.6 14.2 29.6 Large Over 250 0.2 0.2 17.1 35.7R. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 2 3. Management of the C &I waste stream in England 3.1. Duty of Care legislation The C &I waste stream is diverse and complex with many vari- ables. The waste ranges from specialist chemicals through to ma- terials similar in composition to the household stream. The waste is generated from single employee enterprises through to multina- tional businesses. Section 34 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 places a Duty of Care on all businesses to ensure that any controlled waste produced as part of their business or within their workplace is handled safely and within the law ( Great Britain, 1990 ). The regulations require businesses not to leave waste or recycling out on the street without arrangements for its collection. The waste must be contained properly so it does not spill onto the pavement or attacked by vermin. Businesses are responsible for their waste until it has been collected and they must ensure that their service provider is a licensed waste carrier registered with the Environment Agency, the regulatory body for waste in England. A Waste Carriers License means the service provider is legally allowed to collect and transport waste. Throughout the management of waste there is a system of Waste Transfer Notes that records the transfer of waste from one party to another therefore providing an audit stream. Fig. 1 pro- vides an overview of the information required on the Waste Transfer Note. Businesses are legally required to keep copies of Waste Transfer Notes for 2 years as proof of compliance with Duty of Care. Transfer notes are issued every time waste is collected however where collection arrangements are consistent, for example the same types and quantities of waste are collected each week, a single transfer note might be issued to cover the year. It is estimated that 23 million Waste Transfer Notes are produced annually and some 50 million are in storage at one time . To reduce the level of paperwork and to develop a system where the information on these notes could be utilised to improve data on the levels and management of C &I waste, an electronic version called EDOC was launched in 2014. The system is voluntary and could be used by local authorities, private companies or waste producers, and by the beginning of 2017 there were over 5000 active users .In order to meet Duty of Care businesses have two main options. They could pay the local authority to collect their waste. In England local authorities have a legal obligation to manage household waste but they also have a duty to arrange for the collection of waste from businesses if requested . This system dates to the Public Health Act of 1936 where local authorities were empowered, but not obliged to collect waste from businesses and the local authority could make a reasonable charge for collection . At present 68% of local authorities provide a business residual waste collection service and 49% provide a busi- ness recycling collection however the range of materials collected for recycling varies: whereas 97% of these authorities collect cardboard, only 39% collect plastic bottles and 9% food waste . Alternatively, businesses could enter contracts with private waste suppliers ranging from small independent businesses through to multi-national companies. GHK  investigated the management of waste from 1517 SMEs and only 29% of the largest SMEs used local authorities for recycling services compared to 68% for sole traders. This is likely to be due to the private contractors being able to offer a more comprehensive and ﬂexible service than local authorities . According to the Federation of Small Businesses  35% of small businesses are dependent on private waste management contractors as the local authority in their area does not offer a service , private companies meet their needs more ef ﬁciently  or that private companies offer a cheaper service . The private sector playing an important role in the management of C &I waste is not new. Data from 1991 shows that of the 15.3 million tonnes of C &I being generated in England, 80% was collected by the private sector . Globally the approach towards management of C &I waste varies and in some countries businesses are reliant on private waste companies for collection and local authorities have never offered a collection and stopped their ser- vices. For example: the City of Copenhagen, Denmark no longer collects waste and recycling from businesses ( City of Copenhagen, 2018 ); in the 1950s New York City ’s Department of Sanitation stopped collecting C &I waste and transferred responsibility to the private sector . Non-compliance with Duty of Care could have a range of Waste Transfer  Notes:  requiredThe type waste being managed using the List of Wastes   or European Waste Catalogue   (both legally recognised    containment  Time and place of  transfer SIC code (Standard Industrial  for the holder of the waste (this is a  system for recording business type)Name and address of the transferor  and transferee (person receiving the  waste) and their signaturesCapacity in which the transferor and  transferee   producer, importer or registered waste  carrier, broker or dealer) act in that capacity (e.g. their permit  number   Fig. 1. Information required on a Waste Transfer Note ..R. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 3 implications. Firstly, there is no evidence that a business is man- aging its waste responsibly and they could be using the household waste services at the expense of taxpayers. In England households pay Council Tax and some of that revenue contributes towards covering the cost of waste services but only for household waste - it is illegal for businesses to use household services to manage their waste or recycling, even for micro businesses or businesses based at home. Under section 34 A  of the Environmental Protection Act 1990  businesses can be issued with a Fixed Penalty Notice of £300 if they fail to produce a Waste Transfer Note. A business that is not having waste collected could illegally be dumping the waste, this is known as ﬂy tipping. The business could either dump the waste themselves or pay to have their waste collected by an unlicensed contractor who then dumps the waste in public spaces or on private land. Fly tipping is a signi ﬁcant problem in England with approximately 1 million reported incidents annually costing local authorities £57.7 million to clear up . In 2018/19 70,000 of these incidents involved C &I waste, a 3% increase on the previous year (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2019b ). Fly tipping involving C &I waste is not a new problem; research from the early 1980s by the London Wide Initiative On Fly Tipping  estimated between 600,000 and 1 million tonnes of waste was being ﬂy tipped annually with C &I identi ﬁed as being a key contributor. 3.2. Review of literature on Duty of Care compliance Few previous journal papers have researched compliance with Duty of Care regulations in England or compliance with similar regulations in other countries. Wilson led on the two most in-depth peer reviewed studies to date assessing compliance with a range of environmental regulations, including Duty of Care, within SMEs. Whilst both studies had small sample sizes a detailed evaluation of compliance was conducted through visiting premises and inter- viewing SMEs. In the ﬁrst study a three-stage assessment was un- dertaken with 36 SMEs including analysing the detail of information recorded on Waste Transfer Notes. Only 28.0% were found to be completely compliant with the Duty of Care regulations . Further assessment was undertaken at 44 additional SMEs and 35.5% were compliant . Radwan et al.  similarly undertook face to face interviews with nine small hotels to understand level of compliance with Duty of Care. They found that most hotel owners were unaware of their legal requirements for disposing of waste with some illegally using the household services. However, the study was narrow in scope only looking at hotels and again had a limited sample size of 9. All other studies to date have been commissioned by the waste management industry as they have a vested interest in under- standing how businesses manage their waste as historically there has been a problem with businesses using household waste ser- vices. SMEs have been motivated by short term gains and many small businesses took their waste home and disposed of it through the domestic route thereby avoiding charges ( House of Lords Science and Technology Committee, 2008 ). This view has been supported in studies commissioned to estimate levels of C &I waste arisings and management. A common method has been to survey a representative sample of businesses based on sector and number of employees and then extrapolate the results. Studies including Jacobs  and Urban Mines  have omitted surveying businesses with less than 5 employees as the assumption was that much of this waste would be entering the household waste stream. In the GHK  study telephone surveys were conducted with 1517 businesses of which 31% claimed they had not heard of Duty of Care and a third stated that they did not have their waste orrecycling collected. There was a correlation between the number of employees and illegal use of household services: 40% of SMEs with less than four employees were using household services, compared to 5% with over 20 employees, and none for SMEs with over 100 employees. The Right Waste, Right Place campaign was launched in 2016 which is managed by the Environmental Services Association and supported by the Environment Agency, Chartered Institution of Wastes Management and the Environmental Services Association Environment Trust. The campaign aims to increase awareness of Duty of Care amongst businesses and contains lots of useful re- sources and clear guidance on the requirements of businesses to comply with regulations . In 2016 the campaign published data showing there continues to be high levels of non-compliance with 46% of businesses not knowing what happens to their waste once it leaves site and a third not sure whether they completed or kept Waste Transfer Notes ( Right Waste, Right Place, 2017 ). Table 3 presents results of local authority commissioned studies evaluating compliance with Duty of Care Regulations within SMEs. In each between 5% and 35% of businesses stated they were illegallyusing household services to manage their waste. A limitation is that these studies pre-date 2010 and the period of austerity in the UK. Prior to austerity the government had several initiatives to support local authorities conduct research into waste including the Waste Implementation Programme  and Business Resource Ef ﬁ- ciency &Waste Centre for Local Authorities . Post austerity similar programmes have not been established funding more recent research. A range of methods were deployed in these studies. Derbyshire County Council  ,Lancaster City Council  and YouGov  used self-completion questionnaires. Studies also deployed online  or telephone surveys  without visiting businesses in person. As explored in the methodology these approaches have limitations. Household services where C &I waste could illegally be depos- ited include public litter bins, bring sites (central places located typically in car parks or shopping areas where people can take materials for recycling), kerbside collections and Household Waste Recycling Sites. Household Waste Recycling Sites are centralised facilities to where the public can take waste that would not be collected as part of the normal collection service efor example bulky waste, garden waste, or quantities of waste over the limit the local authority would collect from the kerbside. Historically there has been a problem with businesses illegally using these facilities. Cameron- Beaumont and Bridgwater  undertook the most detailed nationwide study to date to evaluate business waste abuse at Household Waste Recycling Sites. The study involved observing waste entering 10 Household Waste Recycling Sites in the Bristol area of England for a week. All vehicles entering the sites were observed and through a combination of vehicle type, type of waste being delivered, bins used, presence of objects indicating a trader , and the subjective view of the surveyor, an assessment was made on if the waste originated from a trader. The surveyor also made an estimate of the volume of waste beingdeposited. However, the research did not conduct detailed analysis to understand the weights and composition of waste entering the sites to corroborate the observations. It was estimated 13% of waste entering the sites was delivered by businesses - at that time if the ﬁgure was extrapolated across England and Wales it would equate to 830,000 tonnes of waste illegally entering sites per annum. In 1995 the government announced the Land ﬁll Tax which placed a levy on each tonne of waste sent to land ﬁll thereby making it more expensive with the aim of promoting alternatives higher up theR. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 4 waste hierarchy ( Landﬁll Tax HC Deb November 28, 1995 vol 267 cc1063-4). In turn this cost was passed onto the generators of waste with the cost of collection increasing. Cameron-Beaumont and Bridgwater  estimated that business waste illegally entering Household Waste Recycling Sites doubled following the introduction of the Land ﬁll Tax. As it became more expensive to have waste collected, businesses looked at alternative ways of disposing of their waste. In 2009 Hampshire County Council esti- mated that 18% of all waste delivered to Household Waste Recycling Sites in the county originated from C &I sources, costing over £1 million per year to dispose of . In recent years local authorities have implemented strategies to cut down on business use of Household Waste Recycling Sites including height barriers preventing vans from accessing sites,vehicle recognition software to monitor any vehicles frequently using sites, and security guards. These restrictions combined with other factors such as the recession, materials being diverted to kerbside collections, and better segregation of waste at sites has seen an overall reduction in residual waste entering Household Waste Recycling Sites from 4.2 million tonnes in 2000/01 to 1.7 million tonnes in 2016/17, a 84.8% reduction ( Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs, 2017 ). Monitoring and enforcing business waste abuse at Household Waste Recycling Sites is somewhat easier than preventing the illegal use of services for household waste at the kerbside or public spaces by businesses. No studies to date have attempted to identify and quantify levels of C &I waste being illegally deposited through kerbside collection or household waste services in public spaces. 4. Methodology 4.1. Phase 1: Interviews with businesses Semi structured interviews were conducted with 100 SMEs in Brighton &Hove City. All participants were recruited by invites submitted through business networks or cold calling. Onrecruitment an interview was arranged at a time convenient with the business. Semi-structured interviews were conducted face-to- face and on average lasted 40 min. Most studies conducted to date have involved either self-completion, online or telephone surveys. This research builds on the approach adopted by Wilson and Radwan through integrating visits to business premises and conducting interviews in person. Interviews have certain advan- tages over self-completion questionnaire efor example the inter- viewer can explain questions that the respondent has not understood, can ask for further elaboration of replies ( Phellas et al., 2011 ) and the researcher can check they correctly understand the response which is not always possible with written replies .Phellas et al.  suggest being asked questions by a sympathetic listener is experienced as morerewarding by research participants than being requested to com- plete a form for an anonymous researcher. Conducting interviews in person also means you are likely to get fuller responses compared to on-line surveys where participants may drop out and in general elicit lower response rates ( Waste and Resources Action Programme, 2010 ). Through conducting face-to-face interviews and visiting the premises the researcher can also validate the re- sponses ( Phellas et al., 2011 ;Waste and Resources Action Programme, 2010 ), in particular for this research check the waste collection arrangements through observing the collection con- tainers present and waste levels. Businesses were chosen to broadly re ﬂect business types in the City with 58% of participants from retail, 19% hospitality (including restaurants, hotels and takeaways), 6% legal services and the remainder from a range of business types. 88% of SMEs interviewed had less than 10 employees, therefore classi ﬁed by the EU as micro businesses, with 61% having less than 4 employees. To ensure data was collected to provide a true indication of how the businesses were managing their waste, there was no discussionin regards Duty of Care and their regulatory obligations. Businesses were questioned on waste management practice, contractual ar- rangements, and on the quantities of waste and recycling theyTable 3 Results from a review of studies evaluating compliance with Duty of Care Regulations within SMEs. Study Location Method Number of businessessurveyedFindings on compliance with Duty of Care Derbyshire County Council Derbyshire Self- completionsurvey507 15% managed their own waste ewith many using household services. Entec  Rutland Telephone survey418 5% were using household waste services. Knowles  Cambridgeshire Cold calling questionnaire194 17% had compliance issues with many using household services. Lancaster City Council Lancaster Mailed questionnaire150 76% of businesses did not recycle. In addition, 18% stated that they used household services to recycle. Urban Mines  Chester, Oldham and BoltonCold calling questionnaire55 Around 25% of businesses admitted to using household services ethis included taking waste home or using Household Waste Recycling Sites and Bring banks. YouGov  UK Online questionnaire610 47% of SMEs did not have a contractor for collecting recycling. 34% of SMEs took their waste home to use the household services. Table 4 Headline results on how the SMEs interviewed managed residual waste and recycling . Residual waste Recycling % of businesses with contract in place for collection 70 50 % of businesses taking materials to business waste depot 1 4 Total % using household waste service 25 38% using HWRS/public bins 15 24% taking waste home to put out in household collections 12 24No answer/don ’t know 5 eR. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 5 generated. 95% of businesses were able to supply data on the containers they used to store their waste and how full they were when collected this was corroborated by observations eallowing proﬁles to be generated on the levels of waste generated. Questions also covered barriers to recycling. Closed questions were analysed through categorisation and tallying of answers to identify the total number of participants who selected a certain response high- lighting common patterns of behaviour. Thematic analysis was conducted of the open-ended questions using coding, creating categories for frequent and common phrases or words. All data was collected in con ﬁdence and analysed anonymously with re- searchers complying with Data Protection Act guidelines. 4.2. Phase 2: Waste composition analysis Brighton and Hove City is home to 275,800 people and located on the south coast of England. The city has a population density of 33.1 persons per hectare placing it in the 15% most densely popu- lated local authority areas in England ( Ofﬁce of National Statistics, 2013 ). 50.2% of the housing stock is ﬂats (a mixture of purpose- built ﬂats, converted or shared houses or apartments in commer- cial buildings) compared to 22.1% for England ( Brighton &Hove City Council, 2014 ). Historically in England local authorities have collected waste directly from households either weekly or increasingly fortnightly. The population density and high level of ﬂats has led to historical waste management problems with resi- dents not having space to store waste, or not wanting to keep it in their homes, therefore putting waste out on non-collection days. As a popular tourist destination and home to two Universities the problem is exasperated by a high transient population and resi- dents not knowing how the waste collection system works or their collection day. Being located on the coast, Brighton &Hove has problems with gulls ripping open bags and thereby littering the streets. In response in 2004 the City Council trialled communal containers for waste collection where residents deposit waste at their convenience with the council emptying bins at regular in- tervals. The system has operated in parts of continental Europe for many years and has now been extended in the city with additional communal bins introduced for recycling in 2011. There are now around 300 /C23200 L residual bins on the streets of the city to cater for approximately 30% of households. This communal approach has been adopted by the other UK authorities including Bristol ( Bristol City Council, 2016 ), Edinburgh  and Newcastle . The research aimed to understand how much C &I waste was being deposited into these containers eagain the containers were for household waste only and it is illegal for businesses to use them. Based on guidance from the local authority, samples of waste were taken from 4 areas etwo from the city centre and two from resi- dential areas. A sample from each area was taken on a Monday and a Wednesday. It was expected that the levels of C &I waste present would be higher in the city centre due to the proximity of busi- nesses and on the Monday as this would be following the weekend when businesses would have had much of their weekly trade (i.e.waste from Saturday and Sunday would be in the collection for Monday). Bin loads were collected as per normal and delivered to a depot for sorting. The sample was sorted into big bags, small bags, and other waste such as loose bulky waste, and then weighed. All bags were then checked for evidence of C &I waste ethis included checking for letter heads, commercial type packaging, receipts, invoices and bags clearly of different composition to household waste. C &I waste was then isolated, sorted into categories and weighed. All staff working on the project complied with the DataProtection Act ethe focus of the research was to understand the levels and composition of C &I waste rather than identifying indi- vidual businesses for follow up. At the time of study Brighton and Hove City Council did not offer a waste or recycling collection to businesses and therefore com- panies had to use non-public sector providers or take materials to dedicated business waste drop off facilities in order to comply with Duty of Care regulations. 5. Results5.1. Phase 1 eInterviews with businesses Table 4 summarises the key results from interviews with the SMEs. Despite the Duty of Care regulations 25% openly stated that they used household services to manage their residual waste with 15% using Household Waste Recycling Sites or public bins, and 12% taking waste home to be put out in household collections (2% were doing both). Similarly, 38% recycled used household waste services with 24% using public bins or Household Waste Recycling Sites, and 24%taking recycling home to place in kerbside collections (10% were doing both). 10% of businesses had service providers for collecting recycling but used household services to manage certain materials including plastic bottles, cardboard and metals which they did not generate in signi ﬁcant enough quantities to warrant a separate collection. Only 70% of businesses interviewed said they had contracts in place for managing residual waste and 50% for recycling. In total 27 different contractors were named for handling waste, recycling or specialist waste streams such as cooking oil ethis excludes those with internal systems or who did not want to name their contractor. Businesses were given the opportunity to set out barriers to recycling eunsurprisingly cost , lack of suitable services  and lack of space  were cited as the main barriers . Interestingly only 3% of businesses stated that they did not produce enough recyclables to warrant a collection. Based on the information supplied by participating businesses it was possible to make an estimate of weekly waste and recycling generated for 95% of businesses sampled . Only 6% of businesses generated less than 60 L of waste per week ethe size of a typical business waste sack. 72% would need a container more than 240 L to contain a weeks ’waste and recycling. 5.2. Phase 2 eWaste composition analysis 3862 kg of waste was collected for analysis with samples vary- ing from 726 kg to 1210 kg (see Table 6 - note Sample 3 of 1210 kg is not included due to no C &I waste being identi ﬁed in the sample). Most of the waste collected was household waste as expected however 6.2% was found to be from businesses. Levels of business waste varied from 11.6% from the City Centre on a Wednesday through to 0% in the residential area on the Monday. The C &I waste stream is heterogeneous - Table 6 contains details on the 10 most common materials and items present. Detailed datawas collected on all materials but for brevity these have been combined into the ‘Other ’category representing 11% of the total C&I waste identi ﬁed. This includes hessian sacks, hair, candles, various types of dense plastic items and packaging, polystyrene and foil. Based upon materials which are commonly included in dry recyclable materials collections in England 30.6% of the material could have been recycled. The main dry recyclables were cardboard , recyclable paper  and glass . By far the biggestR. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 6 category was food waste representing 46.5% of all business waste present. From the composition analysis a range of indicators were developed to identify C &I waste that might be useful for other re- searchers looking to undertake similar studies . Across the four samples there were 36 incidents of business waste abuse of household services involving 33 businesses (three businesses were found to be using the bins on two occasions). In addition, there was business waste from other sources but there was a lack of evidence of where it was from. For example, several cardboard boxes had their delivery address labels removed eseemingly on purpose to avoid detection. 72% of incidents involved businesses from thehospitality industry including cafes, takeaways, restaurants and bed and breakfasts and this is re ﬂected in the large quantity of food waste present. 6. Discussion The results of the interviews and composition analysis support ﬁndings from previous research that a signi ﬁcant number of busi- nesses are still failing to meet their legal Duty of Care requirements and that there is widespread use of household services. Only 70% ofbusinesses had a contractor in place for residual waste and 50% a contractor for recycling. 27% of businesses openly stated that they used household services for residual waste and 38% for recycling. 6.2% of the waste sampled from the household stream was found to be from businesses. The implications of these ﬁndings are re ﬂected on below. 6.1. Financial implications to the taxpayer Businesses using household services are having their waste collection costs subsidised by taxpayers. In 2016/17 an estimated £835 million was spent by local authorities on waste collection and a further £2.0 billion on waste disposal ( Department for Communities and Local Government and National Statistics, 2016 ). The composition analysis showed 6.2% of the household0 1 02 03 04 0CostsLack of suitable servicesLack of space Staﬀ meDecisions made elsewhereLack of staﬀ/management commitment Not a business priorityWe do not produce enough … % of businesses Fig. 2. Barriers to increased recycling . Table 5 Estimated total waste and recycling generated on a typical week by businesses interviewed . Quantity of waste produced per typical week % of businesses Less than a business waste sack 60 L 6 1 or 2 business waste sacks 10Wheeled bin 140 e239 L 12 Wheeled bin 240 L to 359 L 7 Wheeled bin 360 L to 1099 L 27 1100 L to 2199 L 22Over 2200 L 11Unknown 5 Table 6Composition of C &I sampled in the household waste stream - % by weight  not included due to no C &I waste being identi ﬁed). Material Sample 1: City Centre Monday Sample 2: City Centre Wednesday Sample 4: Residential Wednesday Total Sample  1130 796 726 3862 C&I  95.7 92.5 50.9 239.1 C&I  8.5 11.6 7 6.2 Composition of C &I% % % % Food waste 35.3 55.8 50.9 46.5 Cardboard 13.0 13.7 21.8 15.1Recyclable paper 14.3 3.7 0.6 7.3Plastic bags and ﬁlm 7.9 4.0 9.4 6.7 Glass bottles and jars 2.5 4.0 6.1 3.8Cans and aerosols 3.3 2.7 3.9 3.2 Shredded paper 7.2 0.0 0.0 2.9 Wet paper/tissue 0.0 1.3 4.1 1.4Plastic bottles 1.5 0.6 0.8 1.0Wood 1.4 1.1 0.0 1.0Other 13.6 13.1 2.4 11.0R. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 7 stream consisted of waste originating from C &I sources and the interviews support the ﬁndings from other studies that many businesses openly admit to using household services. Even if business waste levels were as low as 1% of the household waste stream nationally savings of £28 million could be achieved from not collecting and disposing of this waste. The diversion of this waste from the household waste stream could generate signi ﬁcant ﬁnancial savings to local authorities with money redirected to priority areas such as health care and education. 6.2. Unfair economic advantage over competitors Businesses that use household services have an economic advantage over their competitors who are being responsible and fulﬁlling their Duty of Care obligations. A claim made by some SMEs is that they do not generate enough material to warrant payment for a separate waste or recycling collection . It was possible to estimate waste and recycling arisings per week for 95% of businesses sampled. Only 6% generated less than 60 L per week e the size of a typical sack, and only 16% less than 140 L, the size of a typical wheeled bin. The average arisings for those businesses that did not have a contractor was 271 L. When questioned regarding barriers to recycling only 3% cited not generating enough waste as being a barrier to recycling. The results would suggest that for most SMEs sampled they generate enough waste to justify, at the very least, a residual waste collec- tion. Other barriers such as will to recycle, space, cost and access to services are more signi ﬁcant. Similar barriers to recycling in SMEs were identi ﬁed by the Federation of Small Businesses  ,GHK  ,Parsons and Kriwoken  ,Radwan et al.  and theWaste Resources Action Programme  . 6.3. Public health implications An important issue is the potential impacts on public health of businesses using household services. 46.5% of the waste sampled was food waste and unless this is managed responsibly this could have severe impacts upon public health. During the analysis nearly 50 kg of raw chicken carcases and bones, evidently from a quick serve restaurant, were found deposited within the household stream. In addition to illegally using household services the busi- ness was in non-compliance with the Animal Bi-Product Regula- tions which sets out the requirement for managing food waste  and therefore putting public health at risk.6.4. Resource leakage The research highlights the leakage of valuable resources from business waste entering the household stream. Combined food waste and dry recyclable materials totalled 77.1% which could have been managed in a more sustainable way with elements recycled, composted or processed through anaerobic digestion. Policy makers are focusing on implementing the Circular Economy how- ever the results from this research highlight that we do not even have the basic building blocks in place to manage SME waste appropriately. 6.5. Impact on progress towards recycling targets Under the EU Waste Framework EU Directive, 2008 (EU Directive, 2008 /98/EC) the UK combined has a 50% recycling target for household waste to meet for 2020. In England the household waste rate has stagnated increasing by 1.1% since 2012 reaching 45.2% in 2017 Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service  . 45% of local authorities have seen their recycling rate reduce over the last 2 years ( Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2017 ). Through businesses using household services the total re- sidual waste level is increased which in turn impacts on the UKs ability to meet the 50% recycling target. Conversely it is noted that, to a lesser degree, levels of C &I waste are also entering the household recycling stream thereby contributing towards the target. With even higher targets announced in the Waste Frame- work Directive  business waste levels entering the household waste stream could pose a further chal-lenge in achieving these targets. 6.6. Impact of austerity measures on enforcement levels In 2010 the government announced public spending cuts of £81 billion by 2014/15 and therefore resources are becoming scarcer forlocal authorities . Research by the Chartered Institution of Waste Management  and Ricardo-AEA  assessed the impact of these austerity cuts across local authority waste, recycling and street cleansing services across the UK and the Republic of Ireland through surveying local authority of ﬁcers. Of local authorities responding 24% stated they had made cuts to enforcement activities etherefore the inadequate enforcement of existing regulations is going to deteriorate further. The survey also asked local authorities for their perception of how austerity measures had impacted on levels of business waste abuse of household services. When removing non-answers e31%Table 7 Indicators used to identify C &I waste present. Sector Indicator All Labels and price tags on products Shop lea ﬂets and ﬂyers Till rollsNames on deliveries Hospitality Wrappings from portion sized packaging e.g. packs of biscuits, butter/sauce/milk portions Paper towels Orders/receipts Catering sized packaging elarge tin cans, sauce containers, large egg cartons Coffee machine groundsKebab skewersTakeaway packagingNewspapers/magazines with the business name written on Small toiletries typically given out in hotels and guest houses Retail Branded bags Shrink wrap from deliveriesR. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 8 of English local authority of ﬁcers felt there had been increases in business waste abuse at Household Waste Recycling Sites with 13% citing a reduction. In terms of household collections from the doorstep 30% felt there had been an increase in abuse of household services with none stating there had been a reduction. This perceived increase could be due to local authorities having less enforcement resources plus businesses having to cut costs during the recession thereby looking for cheaper ways to get rid of their waste. Moreover, the reported levels of ﬂy tipping from businesses increased 3% in 2017/18 compared to the previous year (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2019b ). Less enforcement re- sources could lead to the ﬂy tipping problem getting even worse. The Local Government Association  (the body representing local government) estimate there will be a £8 billion funding gap for local authorities by 2025 eas such resources for enforcement will be further stretched. 7. Recommendations for consideration There are a variety of possible options to improve the manage- ment of waste from SMEs and increase compliance with Duty of Care. 7.1. Duty of Care register Throughout the country enforcement of Duty of Care by local authorities varies greatly and there is no available data on the level and type of enforcement activity being applied. At present there is no universal Duty of Care register that collates information on how businesses are managing their waste and that have a contract with a Licensed Waste Carrier. Development of such a register would have several key bene ﬁts. It would provide local authorities with knowledge of which businesses are managing their waste respon- sibly with registered contractors. The register could be used to identify businesses that are potentially not complying with Duty of Care and who the local authority could target to offer support and guidance, and if non-compliance continues, enforcement. Several bodies are engaged with visiting businesses to ensure they are complying with environmental and public health regulations. For example: waste of ﬁcers inspecting business compliance with Duty of Care; water companies inspecting for business compliance with discharge regulations - under the Water Industry Act 1991 (Great Britain, 1991 ) premises found to be discharging fats, oils, greases and food scraps into the sewer causing blockages or compromise the safe operation of our assets, can be prosecuted); Environmental Health Of ﬁcers inspect businesses for health and safety, food hy- giene and food standards. All these stakeholders have an interest in ensuring businesses are managing their waste responsibility and data gleaned from inspections could be consolidated into the Duty of Care register thereby avoiding the duplication of effort. The Duty of Care register could also potentially act as a deterrent to business waste abuse of household services. Businesses are required to pay business rates and they could be legally required to annually include a copy of their Duty of Care certi ﬁcate when returning relevant paperwork. Whilst this would require adminis-tration from the local authority the costs could be offset from: savings accrued from less waste needing to be disposed of through the household stream; less clear up costs from ﬂy tipping; revenue generated from targeted intelligence led enforcement activity which would result in either businesses being ﬁned for non- compliance or signing up to a collection service provided by the private or public sector. The argument against this would be it becomes an added burden to businesses; however, the counter argument is that thosebusinesses being responsible are being disadvantaged by those rival businesses who are acting illegally. Variants of this system are already operating in the USA. In New York City under the 1996 Recycling Requirements for Licensees pri- vate waste management companies are required to submit a list of customers on a bi-annual basis to the Business Integrity Commis- sion who regulate the private waste sector in the City. This includes contact details of all customers, the date on which services commenced, total charge per month and where the material was taken to . A similar system operates in other parts of the USA such as San Diego ( City of San Diego, 2017 ). A variation is where businesses themselves are required to supply evidence of their waste management arrange- ments. For example, businesses have been legally required to recycle in Philadelphia since 1994 under the Pennsylvania Act 101 and City Ordinance 1251 . Businesses are required to ﬁll out a recycling plan on-line explaining the recycling activities of the business and details of the contractor e hence the City has records of which businesses are complying with regulations. However there have been concerns expressed regarding the effectiveness of the system with many businessesreportedly not submitting recycling plans and lack of follow up from authorities . 7.2. Increased accessibility for SMEs to services In England there is a clear delineation between the household and C &I waste stream ehowever in other countries the waste streams are closer aligned. In some countries business generating less than a certain quantity of waste or located in a speci ﬁc geographical area are permitted to use household services thereby supporting SMEs who want to recycle. Globally there are many models that have been implemented: in Antwerp, Belgium small businesses are allowed to use households services (pers com, 2015); in Baltimore, USA businesses located within residential communities may participate in the recycling programme free of charge ; in Louisville, USA businesses that generate 4 or less 360 L containers of waste per week located in Urban Services District are offered the same service as households (businesses generating more waste have to contract a private hauler) . Adop- tion of a similar system in England would increase accessibility of recycling services to SMEs thereby reducing resource leakage plus additional ef ﬁciencies. McLeod et al.  researched the poten- tial resource ef ﬁciency savings of collecting waste from 25,000 homes and 577 commercial premises together. This approach led to a 9.8% reduction in vehicle mileage equating to savings of £36,800 and carbon equivalent savings of 2688 kg. In England whilst waste and recycling are collected by different service providers depend- ing on the origin of the waste it often ends up being taken to the same facility. The Environmental Services Association  has advocated increased harmonisation to manage household and C &I waste together. Policy Exchange  have supported the merger of the C &I and household waste stream placing a duty on local authorities to collect from small businesses ethis approach would improve services for businesses, yield ef ﬁciency savings, and lead to better planning for C &I waste. 8. Conclusion The research highlights the inadequacies of the existing approach to managing waste from SMEs in England. The results reinforce those from previous studies that a signi ﬁcant number of SMEs are failing to comply with Duty of Care Regulations and are using household services to dispose of their waste. 27% ofR. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 9 businesses stated that they used household services for residual waste and 38% for recycling. Of the residual waste sampled 6.2% of the waste sampled originated from businesses and 77.1% was dry recyclable materials or food waste eresources are being wasted. Globally waste from SMEs is an important and often overlooked waste stream. If Circular Economy principles are to be achieved to need to set up smarter systems to manage waste ﬂows from SMEs. This includes enforcement of relevant legislation, increasing awareness of waste through further supporting initiatives such as ‘Right Waste, Right Place ’and importantly developing a more ef- fectives holistic waste management system which places resources at the core. This paper presents some recommendations for consideration ranging from developing a Duty of Care register to opening household services to SMEs. In the 2018 Waste Strategy the government pledged to improve the management of waste from SMEs including introducing new legislation to make separa- tion of dry recyclable materials mandatory and investigating how shared services could help to improve recycling in SMEs. Whilst encouraging similar pledges have been made in the past with limited impact. Interestingly recent governments reports show that small and micro businesses would not be required to separatematerials for separate collection until 2029 and 2032 respectively e over a decade after the government announced proposals in the Waste Strategy. Suggestions for further work are to duplicate the study in other parts of the country for comparison, and to conduct a more detailed review on systems implemented in other countries to manage waste from SMEs. Other suggestions are to model the potential resource ef ﬁciency bene ﬁts from closer integration of the house- hold and SME waste streams, and to better understand the ap- proaches being used by local authorities to raise awareness amongst business to their Duty of Care requirements and enforcement activity eincluding the adoption of EDOC. Since the completion of this research Brighton &Hove City Council have implemented a collection service for C &I waste and have a new enforcement policy eresearch could be conducted to evaluate what impact these new arrangements are having. CRediT authorship contribution statement Ryan Woodard: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal anal- ysis, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements The author would like to acknowledge the support of Brighton & Hove City Council in undertaking this research and the researchers who assisted in data collection. Aspects of this work were funded through the Santander Business &Collaboration Fund. References Baltimore City Department of Public Works, 2016. City Government, Business & School Recycling. Baltimore City Department of Public Works, Baltimore, USA. http://publicworks.baltimorecity.gov/pw-recycling/business . Accessed 2nd February 2019. Brighton &Hove City Council, 2014. Brighton &Hove City Snapshot Report of Statistics 2014. Brighton &Hove City Council, Brighton, UK . Bristol City Council, 2016. Towards a Zero Waste Bristol: Waste and ResourceManagement Strategy. Bristol City Council, Bristol, UK . Cameron-Beaumont, C., Bridgwater, E., 2002. Trade Waste Input into Civic Amenity Sites. Future West, Bristol, UK . Chartered Institution of Waste Management and Ricardo AEA, 2015. Waste on the Front Line eChallenges and Innovations. The impacts of austerity across local authority waste, recycling and street cleansing services. CIWM, Northampton,UK. City and County of Denver, Colorado, 2016. Code of Ordinances Chapter 48 Waste Management. City and County of Denver, Colorado, USA . City of Copenhagen, 2018. Resource and Waste Management Plan 2018. City of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark . City of Edinburgh Council, 2010. Edinburgh ’s Waste &Recycling Strategy 2010 -2025. City of Edinburgh Council, Edinburgh, UK . City of Louisville, 2005. An Ordinance Repealing Louisville Metro Code of Ordi- nances  Sections 156.051   through  and 156.055 and Re- enacting A New Chapter 51 Relating to Solid Waste. City of Louisville. Louis- ville, USA . City of Philadelphia, 2018. Solid waste plan. http://www.philadelphiastreets.com/ commercial/solid-waste-plan/ . Accessed 1 stApril 2019. City of San Diego, 2017. Environmental services ereporting. https://www.sandiego. gov/environmental-services/recycling/ro/reporting . Accessed 1stAugust 2019. City of Sydney, 2013. Waste Policy Local Approvals Policy for Managing Waste in Public Places. City of Sydney, Sydney, Australia . Denscombe, M., 2014. The Good Research Guide: for Small Scale Research Projects, ﬁfth ed. Open University Press, New York, USA . Department for Business, Energy &Industrial Strategy and Of ﬁce for National Statistics, 2018. Business Population Estimates for the UK and Regions 2018: Detailed Tables. BEIS, London, UK. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/ business-population-estimates-2018 . Accessed 15thOctober 2019. Department for Communities, , Local Government, National Statistics, 2016. Reve- nue Account Budget 2016-17. DCLG, London UK . Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2017. Local Authority Collected Waste Statistics - Local Authority Data. HMSO, London, UK. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/ env18-local-authority-collected-waste-annual-results-tables . Accessed 13th April 2019. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2019. UK Statistics on Waste e7thMarch 2019. HMSO, London, UK. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ attachment_data/ ﬁle/784263/UK_Statistics_on_Waste_statistical_notice_ March_2019_rev_FINAL.pdf . Accessed 23rd January 2020. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011a. Waste Policy Review. DEFRA, London, UK . Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011b. Controls on Animal By- Products Guidance on Regulation  1069/2009 and accompanying imple- menting Regulation  142/2011, enforced in England by the Animal By- Products   Regulations 2011. HMSO, London, UK . Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2017. Local authority collected waste statistics - local authority data 16/17. https://www.gov.uk/government/ statistical-data-sets/env18-local-authority-collected-waste-annual-results-ta- bles. Accessed 13thApril 2019. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2011. Survey of Commercial and Industrial Waste Arisings 2010 e Revised Final Results. HMSO, London, UK . Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Government Statistical Service, 2019. Fly-tipping statistics for England, 2018/19 e7thNovember 2019. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ attachment_data/ ﬁle/845171/FlyTipping_201819_Statistical_Release_FINAL_ Accessible.pdf . Accessed 23rdJanuary 2020. Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2018. Our Waste, Our Re- sources: A Strategy for England. HM Government, London, UK . Department of Energy, 1991. Industrial and Commercial Waste as Fuel. 204 Tech- nology Summary. Energy Technology Support Unit, Harwell, UK . Derbyshire County Council, 2007. Business Waste Survey Analysis. Derbyshire County Council, Derby, UK . ECORYS, 2012. EU SMEs in 2012: at the Crossroads. Annual Report on Small and Medium Enterprises in the EU, 2011/12. ECORYS, Rotterdam, Netherlands . Edoconlinecouk, 2017. Edoc Celebrates its 3rd Birthday! eJanuary 16th2017. EDOC. https://www.edoconline.co.uk/edoc-celebrates-its-3rd-birthday/ . Accessed 1st February 2017. Entec, 2008. A Survey of Commercial and Industrial Waste Arisings in the County of Rutland. Entec, Northwich, UK . Environmental Services Association, 2016. Delivering Sustainable Growth: How the Resource and Waste Management Industry Bene ﬁts People, the Environment and the Economy. Environment Services Association, London, UK . EU Directive, 2008. 98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November on Waste and Repealing Certain Directives . EU Directive, 2018. 851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 Amending Directive 2008/98/EC on Waste . European Commission, 2005. The New SME De ﬁnition: User Guide and Model Declaration. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium . Federation of Small Business, 2010. FSB National Panel Results November 2010. FSB, London, UK . Federation of Small Business, 2011. The Waste Review ethe Small Business Case. FSB, London, UK .R. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 10 GHK, 2010. Recycling Activities in SMEs. GHK, London, UK . Great Britain, 1936. Public Health Act 1936 . Great Britain, 1990. Environmental Protection Act . Great Britain, 1991. Water Industry Act . HM Treasury, 2010. Spending Review 2010. The Stationary Of ﬁce, Norwich, UK . House of Lords Science and Technology Committee, 2008. 6thReport of Session 2007-08 Waste Reduction Volume I: Report. The Stationary Of ﬁce, London, UK . International Labour Organization, 2020. The power of small: unlocking the po- tential of SMEs. https://www.ilo.org/infostories/en-GB/Stories/Employment/ SMEs#footer . Accessed May 22nd2020. Jacobs, 2011. Commercial and Industrial Waste Survey 2009 Final Report May 2011. Jacobs Engineering, London, UK . Knowles, T., 2008. Resource Saver Practices Survey ean Analysis in Relation to Recycling Trends and Compliance Issues. Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Joint Waste Partnership. Cambridge, UK . Lancaster City Council, 2006. Commercial Recycling and Reuse: Business Waste Recycling Possibilities within Lancaster and Morecombe. Lancaster City Council, Lancaster, UK . Landﬁll Tax HC Deb 28 November 1995 vol 267 cc1063-4. Lee, S., 2013. Knowledge Is Power in a New Business Age. Materials Recycling Week, pp. 30 e31, 7th September 2013 . Local Government Association, 2018. Councils Face Almost £8 Billion Funding Black Hole by 2025. LGA, 3rdJuly 2018. https://www.local.gov.uk/about/news/ councils-face-almost-ps8-billion-funding-black-hold-2025 . Accessed 1st October 2018. London Wide Initiative on Flytipping, 1984. Report of the London-wide Initiative on Fly Tipping Working Party. Greater London Corporation, London, UK . Maynard, S., Cherrett, T.J., 2009. Characteristics of Retail Waste Logistics on Winchester High Street. University of Southampton, Southampton, UK . McDaniel, J., Bond, M., 2017. Philly Businesses Aren ’t Recycling, and the City Could Be Losing Out on Millions. The Inquirer. December 22nd2017. http://www. philly.com/philly/news/pennsylvania/philly-business-recycling-spotty- enforcement-millions-lost-20171222.html . Accessed 1stMay 2018. McLeod, F., Cherrett, T., Waterson, B., 2011. The scope for joint household/com- mercial waste collections: a case study. International Journal of LogisticsResearch and Applications 14 , 399 e411. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 13675567.2011.641526 . New York Department of Sanitation, 2012. Commercial Solid Waste Study and Analysis 2012. New York Department of Sanitation, New York City, USA . Newcastle City Council, 2015. New Communal Bins to Be Introduced in Areas of Newcastle ’s West End. Newcastle City Council, Newcastle, UK. https://www. newcastle.gov.uk/news-story/new-communal-bins-be-introduced-areas-newcastles-west-end . Accessed July 20 th2018. Ofﬁce of National Statistics, 2013. 2011 census: population density, local authoritiesin England and Wales. https://www.ons.gov.uk/ ﬁle?uri¼/ peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/population estimates/datasets/2011censuspopulationestimatesby ﬁveyearagebandsand householdestimatesforlocalauthoritiesintheunitedkingdom/r12ukrttablep04u kv2_tcm77-304141.xls . Accessed 23rdJanuary 2020. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2019. SME and Entre- preneurship Outlook 2019. OECD, Paris, France . Parsons, S., Kriwoken, L.K., 2009. Report: Maximizing recycling participation to reduce waste to land ﬁll: a study to medium-sized enterprises in Holbart, Tas- mania, Australia. Waste Manag. Res. 28 , 472 e477. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0734242X08099336 . Phellas, C., Bloch, A., Seale, C., 2011. Structured methods: interviews, questionnaires and observation. In: Seale, C. , Researching Society and Culture, 3 edn. SagePublications Ltd, London, UK . Policy Exchange, 2009. A Waste Opportunity? How to Get the Most Out of Britain ’s Bins. Policy Exchange, London, UK . Radwan, H.R.I., Jones, E., Minoli, D., 2010. Managing solid waste in small hotels. J. Sustain. Tourism 18 , 175 e190. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 09669580903373946 . Right Waste, Right Place, 2017. Right waste, Right place enews. http://www. rightwasterightplace.com/news/ . Accessed October 1 st2019. Urban Mines, 2007. Resource Ef ﬁciency for Retailers. Report for the North West Development Agency. Urban Mines, Halifax, UK . Urban Mines, 2011. North East of England Commercial and Industrial Waste Survey. For the North East Sustainable Resources Board. Urban Mines, Halifax, UK . Waste and Resources Action Programme, 2010. Monitoring and Evaluation Guid- ance. WRAP, Banbury, UK . Waste Resources Action Programme, 2011. Increasing SME Recycling. WRAP, Ban- bury, UK . Waste Resources Action Programme, 2013. Local Authority Commercial Waste Services Survey 2011/12 eEngland. WRAP, Banbury, UK . Wilson, C.D.H., Williams, I.D., Mair, N., Lowe, C., 2007. Environmental compliance in small to medium-sized enterprises : Experiences from the north west of England. Communications in Waste and Resource Management 8 , 76 e85. December 2007 . Wilson, C.D.H., Williams, I.D., Kemp, S., 2015. Environmental  compliance control systems for UK SMEs. In: Waste &Resource Management eProceedings of the Institute of Civil Engineers, 168, pp. 37 e50.https://doi.org/10.1680/ warm.14.00007 . February 2015. World Bank, 2020. Small and medium enterprises  ﬁnance. https://www. worldbank.org/en/topic/sme ﬁnance . Accessed May 22nd2020. YouGov, 2007. Recycling in UK Plc A State of the Workplace Report eCommissioned by Taylor Intelligence. Taylor Intelligence, Droitwich, UK .R. Woodard / Journal of Cleaner Production 278  123770 11 

