OPINION PAPER Resource Resurgence from COVID-19 Waste via Pyrolysis: a Circular Economy Approach Biswajit Debnath1,2&Shiladitya Ghosh3&Neelanjan Dutta4 Received: 28 May 2021 / Accepted: 11 August 2021/ #The Author, under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021 Abstract Since the end of 2019, COVID-19 pandemic has affected 220 countries and currently majority of the world is facing the wrath of the second wave. One ofthe outcomes of the ongoing pandemic is the generation of huge amount of solidpolymeric “COVID-waste ”comprising medical waste, personal protective equip- ment  waste, packaging waste, and other household waste with potentialinfectious components residing on it. Thermochemical route is the preferred treatment and effective way of disposal of such infectious polymeric waste. Typically, incineration is employed to ens ure complete destruction of the patho- gens which is not a resource-efficient met hod. Pyrolysis is a sustainable alterna- tive which can handle the present COVID-waste stream in short-term andlong-term yielding valuable fuel and mate rial products. Recently published liter- ature in this avenue have clearly shown the versatility of this technology inefficiently handling both mono and mix ed stream of polymers. Based on facts, we propose a resource resurgence framew ork that utilizes pyrolysis as the core conversion route for effectively handl ing COVID-waste streams. Our framework suggests how these plants can be operational and helpful in generation of revenuein post-pandemic times as well. We expect that the conscientious adoption ofpyrolysis will certainly lead us towards a circular economy paradigm. Keywords COVID-19 .COVID-waste .Resource recovery .Pyrolysis .Circular economy . SustainabilityCircular Economy and Sustainability https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-021-00104-2 *Neelanjan Dutta neel2job@gmail.com 1Chemical Engineering Department, Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700032, India 2Department of Mathematics, ASTUTE, Aston University, B47ET, Birmingham, UK 3Department of Food Technology, Guru Nanak Institute of Technology, Kolkata 700114, India 4Department of Civil Engineering, NIT Sikkim, Sikkim, India Introduction Outbreak of the terribly uncontrolled menacing pandemic COVID-19 caused due to the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus version 2 , has affected 220 coun- tries and territories globally, causing 169,648,062 confirmed cases of infection and 3,525,426confirmed deaths, as of 28th May 2021 . In the beginning months of 2020, a state of emergency was announced worldwide and imposed forthwith by World Health Organisation. As the primary measure of defence in an absolutely cureless situation, WHO hasurged public health authorities in the respective affected countries to contain the spread of thevirus within social spheres as small as possible to disrupt the chain of transmission of theoutbreak. The virus transmits through micro/macro droplets produced during sneezing or coughing by an infected human . Personal protective equipment  such as masks, gloves, PPE wearable kits, face shields, and personal hygiene products like alcohol-basedsanitizers and surface sterilizers are the primary protections and commodities that werepromptly put to compulsory use by the non-homebound people to minimize the risk ofinfection. This led to a sudden and enormous upsurge in the use of PPEs, majorly in themedical and human transport sectors. Fast forward to May 2021, some vaccines have surfacedsuch as BNT162b2 by Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna by AstraZeneca, and COVISHIELD bySerum Institute of India . Mass vaccination is slowly taking pace and amidst this, the world is experiencing the tsunami of the second wave, with countries like India being highly affected . These breakthroughs in vaccine development are commendable but recent concerns have emerged with the efficacy related to mutated variations of the virus . Despite all these, the continual use and demand for the PPE are increasing exponentially. As a result of their majorly “single-use ”nature, the used and disposed PPEs are adding up to the ever-growing piles of complex anthropogenic solid waste. The overall composition of thesolid waste stream has changed strikingly during this pandemic situation. Fear and anxietyhave driven unnecessary stockpiling of food and groceries due to nationwide imposition of lockdown and consequent uncertainties have significantly altered the food waste generation dynamics. Considering the dry waste only, several used masks, gloves, PPE, empty sanitizerbottles, used tissue papers, and lots of packaging waste have increased in a typical “urban ” waste stream generated in the metros and cities . Another contributor to the rise in the quantity of packaging waste is due to a steep increase in e-commerce shopping, which hasbecome a habit during the lockdown periods and to some extent, fear of contracting theCOVID-19 virus . On the embarkment of the COVID-19, medical waste generation reached up to 240 tons per day, in Wuhan city, China , whereas there was a 30% increase in medical waste generation in Malaysia by March 2020 . To keep things simple, we term these infectious wastes as “COVID-waste ”that includes medical waste, PPE waste, and other household waste with potential infectious components including discarded packaging waste.According to Prata et al. , the global monthly demand of gloves was almost 65 billion whereas for facemasks it was 129 billion to tackle COVID-19. The daily usage of facemaskshas been estimated to be 7 billion per day . As estimated by Hantoko et al. , North America generated nearly 72 kilotons of medical waste; followed by Europe, Asia, and SouthAmerica with 70 kilotons, 55.6 kilotons, and 37 kilotons respectively, whereas Africa and Oceania are generating least amount of medical waste with 8.3kilotons and 0.12 kilotons respectively, based on facemasks only. The demand in PPE kits is projected to increase by40% due to COVID-19 by WHO . This article presents discussions on the ongoing thermochemical management efforts of COVID-waste, specifically focusing on conversionCircular Economy and Sustainability through pyrolysis and established a framework for highlighting the resource resurgence potential from the perspective of circular economy. Current Scenario of COVID-waste Generation The rapidly changing composition is not only dictating a paradigm shift for the solid wastemanagement  industry but also indicating the probability ofcross-contamination-contraction. The extremely infectious SARS-CoV-2 virus can persist insurfaces of cardboard, plastic, and metals for hours to days  . Hence, open dumping of COVID-waste carelessly will directly lead to high health risk of ground-level workers, especially in developing nations where rag pickers and waste collectors are not well aware of the viral contraction and are not equipped with PPEsthemselves. There are several cases where workers in SWM facilities have tested COVIDpositive due to cross-contamination, an un-dismissible source of which may be the solidwastes . This way, the medical and domestic fractions of the Covid-induced solid wastes produced globally are posing an ugly threat to the environment. This biohazard-laden plasticwaste must be treated through a green route to free the environment from this burden in aneco-friendly manner and abiding by the global agenda of circular economy to contribute to sustainable waste management practices . The commonly practiced plastic recycling and recovery methods were also affected by excessive PPE usage due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which is strongly boosting environ-mental pollution. As the PPEs include plastics as key constituents, the disposal of themwithout being recycled enhances the number of hazardous pollutants such as dioxins andtoxic metals in the environment . Due to the fast change of composition and characteristics of the generated waste, authorities are finding it difficult to cope up as the built infrastructuresare not yet fully adapted and upscaled to efficiently handle such huge volume of PPE waste . The wrath of the second wave of the ongoing pandemic has increased the generation of packaging materials and other medical things. The generation rate is expected to increase by44.8% and 13.2% respectively due to higher demand of PPE kits and online food andessentials delivery . In the healthcare sector, the demand of different commodities such as face shields, gloves, trash bags, and masks also increases the demand of different types ofpolymers such as polypropylene , polyvinylchloride , and polyethylene terephthal-ate   which are also creating huge amount of plastic waste. Additionally, with the second wave, the demands of online grocery and food delivery services have increased. While the business giants are trying to seize the opportunity, the resulting waste streams are contributing to more and more COVID-waste. Available Practices for COVID-waste Management COVID-waste is infectious and bio-hazardous which needs to be disposed in a controlledenvironment of thermal treatment to destroy any living pathogen . As the volume of waste surges up, existing capacity of waste treatment may not be enough, which will call for new facility establishment. An intelligent alternative is to utilize the existing MSW incinerators. As proposed by United Nation Environment Programme , steam sterilization and microwaving are the two most preferred technologies whereas the incineration of differentCircular Economy and Sustainability categories are the secondary preferred . Incineration does kill the pathogens and ensures that all toxic compounds are completely decomposed . However, it is neither resource-efficient nor an eco-friendly technology. In developing countries like India, the increasing amount of packaging waste plastics such as polypropylene , low-density polyethylene , high-density polyethylene , polyethylene terephthalate ,and polystyrene  are creating massive pressure in open dumping yards and landfill sites.Discarded materials including contaminated face masks, gloves, and PPEs can aggravateenvironmental and health problems, particularly in countries like India, where the solid wastemanagement system is still in the developing phase and yet to attain a fully dedicated stagewithin the whole chain of waste disposal to recycling. Biodegradation of plastic waste is still a lingering challenge and only few early laboratory scale reports are available; hence, it cannot be adopted as a measure to treat and manage the highly recalcitrant COVID-waste. The most common approach to the present COVID-wastestream is to incinerate  the waste. Regarding the ease of operation, incineration isused as an “on-site ”treatment of the COVID-waste, which is not so easy with other options like land filling. However, incineration is not a resource-efficient approach of waste manage-ment, as it is a route for direct destruction not recovery/recycling. Incineration is also adverselycriticized for its huge carbon footprint produced from any type of solid waste  being combusted. Keeping in view the huge volume of the COVID-wastes, inciner- ation should be deemed unsuitable as a primary option for treatment. Pyrolysis: a Promising Resource Resurgence Route for COVID-waste The joint agenda of implementing circular economy and sustainability in all future waste management systems calls for an efficient and suitable technology for COVID-waste handling. Pyrolysis will serve as an alternative and arguably a sustainable technology to handle the present COVID-waste stream in short term and long term. Compared to incineration, pyrolysis is reported to be an eco-friendlier and resource-efficient process . As a well-known green engineering approach, pyrolysis has long been adopted for recyclingmultiple types of solid waste including both biomass and plastic wastes . Definitively, pyrolysis is the decomposition of feedstock in the absence of oxygen, which produces usefulproducts, i.e. pyro-liquid, pyro-gas, and pyro-char or solid residue. Despite production of solid,liquid, and gaseous products, pyrolysis is majorly used for production of the “liquid oil part ”. Due to the usefulness of all the products and their collection for further use, unlike inciner- ation, no product stream is directly open to the environment, which makes it a green process. It is reported by multiple previous studies that oil fraction reaches the maximum among allpyro-products when plastic or synthetic polymeric materials are used as feedstock . Operating temperature of pyrolysis plays the key role in the yield of maximum liquid or gasvia the pyrolysis process, having a typical range of 623 –873K. Configuration of the pyrolysis reactor and use of catalyst also have pronounced effects and need to be considered for betterproduct yield . Different kinds of plastic wastes, including a considerable amount of packaging plastics, being produced during this pandemic period, can be directly converted into fuel via pyrolysis without segregation. It is a very important fact for the COVID-waste that at their site of generation they are appearing as a relatively “source segregated ”waste, due to the presence of contagious virus, which makes it un-mixable with other wastes. Segregatedwaste is always best for maximum resource recovery . Many researchers confirm thatCircular Economy and Sustainability pyrolysis of waste plastics yields significant quantity of oil  . Hence, it is very well documented that pyrolysis process is considered as an effective and eco-friendly route for handling and converting the plastic or polymeric wastes to useful products since a long time. Therefore, in the context of the present article, the experimental case studies using COVID-19-induced polymeric wastes having similar composition as thepyrolysis feedstocks have been selectively highlighted to indicate its adoption as an efficienttreatment technology. In Table 1, the information from latest articles reporting experimental studies on the pyrolysis of the polymeric wastes generated at excessively high rates during theoutbreak of COVID-19 pandemic are presented. The effectiveness of pyrolysis process indifferent countries of the world for sustainable disposal of COVID-19 wastes along withrecovery of valuable resources is tabulated. From the data represented in Table 1,i tc a nb e observed that a good quantity of liquid fuel rich in several hydrocarbon compounds was obtained from the pyrolysis of different polymeric wastes in the form of pyro-oil, which can beused as an alternative source of energy as a blend-in additive. The pyro-gas is also identified asan energy-rich product of pyrolysis. However, use of catalyst may help to bring down the optimum temperature required for the pyrolysis process. There are specific effects of temperature as well as the catalyst on theproduct distribution . Fine-tuning of these factors controls the percentage of aromatics and other desired chemicals in the pyro-oil and its fuel value (calorific value or higher heating value). Over the last decade, numerous research articles investigated and reported effect of several parameters of pyrolysis of different types of polymeric plastics  on the production of pyro-oil ). This will drive the adoption of pyrolysis as an efficient COVID-waste management and recycling method and constructionof dedicated pyrolysis plants for the said purpose. The generated pyro-oil are used as analternative fuel in gas turbines, generators, and boiler systems . The fuel value of obtained distilled pyro-oil of packaging waste  was close to diesel with longhydrocarbon chains  which confirms the robustness of the technology . The gaseous or non-condensable part which evolved due to pyrolysis can be fed back for partial Table 1 Resource recovery from polymeric waste materials generated during COVID-19 pandemic using pyrolysis Sl. no.Type of waste materialsPolymer typePyrolysis temperature Resource recovery Country References 1 Face mask, PPE kits, packaging materialsPP 723 92.3% oil, 4.1% gas, and 3.6% charIndia  2. 3-ply face mask PP 678 - 783 96.6% volatiles, chemical compounds, including pentane, 2,4-dimethyl-1-hepteneLithuania, Russia &E g y p t 3. Waste face mask 823 80.7% oil yield. with HY zeolite catalyst 67% higher BTEX yield.Korea  4. Disposable face maskPP & PE 873 Syngas and C1-2 hydrocarbons. Ni/SiO 2catalyst expedites H 2 and CH 4generation.Korea and China 5. Mix of gloves and face maskPP + PVC673 75% oil, 15% gas, and 10% char.Ethiopia Circular Economy and Sustainability heating of the reactor. The final flue gas can be controlled using standard pollution control equipment. The residue or the char is a suitable feedstock for the preparation of sorbentmaterial as well as nanostructured carbon materials . Proposed Resource Resurgence Framework for COVID-waste Management On the basis of the foregoing facts, we propose a resource resurgence framework that utilizes pyrolysis as the core conversion route for effectively handling COVID-waste streams. Weassume a significant amount of waste is source segregated. As shown in Figure 1,w a s t e collection from households and curb side is executed by the trained Urban Local Bodies . Biomedical waste management companies carry out the collection from hospitalsthrough proper channel maintaining all safety protocols administered by WHO. Collectedwaste containing synthetic polymeric fraction is fed to the optimally designed pyrolysisprocess and produces pyro-oil, pyro-char, and pyro-gas through the thermochemical conver-sion. We recommend in-situ utilization of pyro-gas in the reactor itself, while the other twoproducts can be helpful in revenue generation. A treatment, storage, and disposal facility handles any hazardous fraction that is generated as side stream from the core unit of process plant. The framework is also applicable for COVID-waste collected from public places, eateries, and shops as well those that generate a substantial quantity of disposablesand other polymeric waste. This will allow the resource to be circulated along the value chainin a“closed flow ”, conforming to the circular economy principles . In the post-pandemic time, the plant will continue to serve as a primary waste management facility for treating allother synthetic polymeric city-wastes generated in future. Fig. 1 Suggestive framework showing waste management scheme utilizing pyrolysis as a potential technology for resource resurgence. Waste collected from households, curb side, and hospitals is subjected to pyrolysis. Pyro-oil and pyro-char can be used for revenue generation while there is in situ utilization of the pyro-gas for heating purposeCircular Economy and Sustainability Pyrolysis is slowly getting momentum in the large-scale processing of plastics to fuel scenario. In India, there are a few pilot plants converting plastics to fuel. Rudra EnvironmentalSolutions India Limited is one of the benchmark pyrolysis plants in Pune, India. The plant was set up in 2010 with a capacity of 50kg per day and now a third-generation plant is operating since 2016 with a capacity of 500 kg per day . A group of researchers at IIT Delhi have patented the technology for conversation of plastics to fuel range products T h e ya r e planning to use the installed laboratory facility for treatment plastics collected by South DelhiMunicipal Corporation  . A future full-scale plant is expected down the line. Pyrolysis has also been tested with multi-layered packaging  waste using commercialzeolite catalyst in pilot scale, which suggests that biaxial oriented polypropylene MLPs canproduce more than 70% oil . Jectec, a Japan-based company, is also implementing pyrolysis for treatment of cable wires . Sparta group in Canada is also implementing pyrolysis for converting non-recyclable plastics into fuel . The proposed framework  can be extended towards developing benchmark practices considering other non-COVID-waste streams such as plastic waste, e-waste, agro-waste, and municipal waste. Implementation of the concept of circular economy begun at various industries, as they are identified as the largest producers of solid waste in a global scenario . In the developing countries, it is still at the initial level of implementation, due to less awareness. It is expectedthat waste-less industries will rise with circular economy as a guiding principle, which will ultimately lead towards sustainable development . As discussed earlier, the proposed framework illustrated in Figure 1may serve as a “prototype ”for designing models of resource recovery plants handling multiple wastes including COVID-19 waste as pyrolysis feedstocksin accordance with the circular economy criterion. The discussions presented in the precedingsections have highlighted the resource potential of the COVID-waste and its recovery throughpyrolysis process following circular economy. Further increase in circularity is possible withhigher public awareness and better policy control and monitoring at the national level. Thiswill facilitate realization and preservation of resource value of the COVID-waste by avoiding mixing and channelization of feedstock towards the processing plant as much as possible. Pyrolysis, being a resource-efficient process, is expected that in near future, the demand forpyrolysis plant as COVID-waste handling and valorization units will only increase. Theseunits can serve as a common resource recovery facility  for waste coming frommultiple waste-sorting facilities, similar to common effluent treatment plants. Hence, this isnot a one-stop solution, rather a beginning towards closing the loop. Conclusion In recent times, the whole world is confronting numerous challenges for revitalizing theeconomic breakdown caused due to the pandemic. The proposed resource resurgence strategyof utilizing pyrolysis as the core waste management route will not only reduce the extreme environmental burden but also will ensure resource circula-tion, thereby promoting circular economy. Pyrolysis will efficiently contribute towards creat-ing a sustainable and resource-efficient treatment technology via the production of liquid fuel from various waste plastics and PPE kits. A balanced socio-economic growth, along with the environmental benefits, will help to reduce the future crisis to some extent. Researchers,private companies, entrepreneurs, and policymakers should come forward with joint effort tosolve the issue of waste reduction by considering the current pandemic as an opportunity ofCircular Economy and Sustainability developing new sustainable business models, rather than treating it just as an environmental concern. Development of COVID-waste treatment and valorization frameworks as the oneproposed in this article will instigate the awareness and deployment of circular economy approach in the present and post-COVID era. We expect that the conscientious adoption of sustainable technologies, such as pyrolysis, will affirmatively lead us towards a circulareconomy paradigm. Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the help and inputs received from Prof. Anirban Gupta, IIEST Shibpur, during the preparation of this manuscript. Additionally, inputs from Dr. Saswati Gharami, Jadavpur University, were insightful for the authors. Author Contribution Led by BD, and co-conceptualized by ND, the foundation was substantiated by SG. Data mining was carried out by all the authors. Resource recovery framework based on circular economy concept was developed by BD with analysis and inputs from SG and ND. All authors have read and agreed to this version of the manuscript. Data Availability N/A Code Availability No codes were used. Declarations Conflict of Interest The authors declare no competing interests. Disclaimer Any opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the affiliated universities of the authors. References 1. Woldometer, . Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic. Accessed 2021, January 21. https://www. worldometers.info/coronavirus/ . 2. Woldometer, . Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic. Accessed 2021, May 28. https://www. worldometers.info/coronavirus/ 3. Spinelli A, Pellino G  COVID-19 pandemic: perspectives on an unfolding crisis. Journal of British Surgery 107:785 –787 4. Tyagi K, Ghosh A, Dipti NAIR, Pyrolysis K, Bhandari PS, Ansari IA, Misra A  Breakthrough COVID19 infections after vaccinations in healthcare and other workers in a chronic care medical facility in New Delhi, India. Clinical Research & Reviews, Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome 5. Cdc.gov. . Different COVID-19 vaccines. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://www. cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/vaccines/different-vaccines.html . Accessed 14 May 2021 6. Seruminstitute.com . Serum Institute of India - ChAdOx1 nCoV- 19 Corona Virus Vaccine  - COVISHIELD. Seruminstitute.com .https://www.seruminstitute.com/product_covishield. php. Accessed 14 May 2021 7. The Lancet  India ’s COVID-19 emergency. Lancet 397:1683 8. Possas, C., de Souza Antunes, A. M., de Oliveira, A. M., de Souza Mendes, C. D. U., Ramos, M. P., Schumacher, S. D. O. R., & Homma, A. . Vaccine innovation for pandemic preparedness: patent landscape, global sustainability, and circular bioeconomy in post-COVID-19 era. Circular Economy and Sustainability, 1-23 9. Hantoko D, Li X, Pariatamby A, Yoshikawa K, Horttanainen M, Yan M  Challenges and practices on waste management and disposal during COVID-19 pandemic. J Environ Manag 286:112140 10. Leal Filho W, Voronova V, Kloga M, Paço A, Minhas A, Salvia AL et al  COVID-19 and waste production in households: a trend analysis. Sci Total Environ 777:145997Circular Economy and Sustainability 11. Tang, W. . The medical waste related to COVID-2019 is cleaned up every day —the medical waste treatment market needs to be standardised. 21st Century Business Herald. http://www.21jingji.com/2020/3- 12/xNMDEzODFfMTU0MjIxNQ.html .A c c e s s e d1 4M a y2 0 2 1 . 12. Agamuthu P, Barasarathi J  Clinical waste management under COVID-19 scenario in Malaysia. Waste Manag Res 39:18 –26.https://doi.org/10.1177/0734242X20959701 13. Prata JC, Silva AL, Walker TR, Duarte AC, Rocha-Santos T  COVID-19 pandemic repercussions on the use and management of plastics. Environ Sci Technol 54:7760 –7765 14. Hantoko, D., Li, X., Pariatamby, A., Yoshikawa, K., Horttanainen, M., Yan, M.  Challenges and practices on waste management and disposal during COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Environmental Management 286112140-10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112140 15. Singh N, Tang Y, Ogunseitan OA  Environmentally sustainable management of used personal protective equipment. Environ Sci Technol 54:8500 –8502 16. Kampf G, Todt D, Pfaender S, Steinmann E  Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate surfaces and their inactivation with biocidal agents. J Hosp Infect 104:246 –251 17. Van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, Holbrook MG, Gamble A, Williamson BN, Tamin A, Harcourt JL, Thornburg NJ, Gerber SI, Lloyd-Smith JO  Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV- 2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1. N Engl J Med 382:1564 –1567 18. Mallapur, C. . Indian households ’ineffective waste management is putting sanitation workers at risk of Covid-19. Scroll.in. https://scroll.in/article/958711/indian-households-ineffective-waste-management-is- putting-sanitation-workers-at-risk-of-covid-19 .A c c e s s e d1 4M a y2 0 2 1 19. Antoniadou M, Varzakas T, Tzoutzas I  Circular economy in conjunction with treatment methodol- ogies in the biomedical and dental waste sectors. Circ Econ Sust. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-020- 00001-0 20. Sarkodie, S. A., & Owusu, P. A. . Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on waste management. Environment, Development and Sustainability. doi:10.1007/s10668-020-00956-y 21. United Nations Environment Programme , 2020. How to choose your waste management technol- ogy to treat COVID-19 waste. https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/32778/FS3.pdf .. 22. World Health Organization , 2017. Safe management of wastes from health-care activities: a summary. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre am/handle/10665/259491/WHO-FWC-WSH-17.05-eng.pdf; jsessionid=77A8E6456068068F87A5FC473E3EC168?sequence =1. Accessed 14 May 2021 23. Nikolaou IE, Jones N, Stefanakis A  Circular economy and sustainability: the past, the present and the future directions. Circ Econ Sust 1:1 –20.https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-021-00030-3 24. Nikolaou IE, Jones N, Stefanakis A  Circular economy and sustainability: the past, the present and the directions. Circular Economy and Sustainability 1:1 –20 25. Ghosh A, Debnath B, Ghosh SK, Das B, Sarkar JP  Sustainability analysis of organic fraction of municipal solid waste conversion techniques for efficient resource recovery in India through case studies. Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management 20:1969 –1985 26. Dutta N, Gupta A  An experimental study on conversion of high density polyethylene and polypropylene to liquid fuel. Clean Techn Environ Policy. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10098-021-02121-z 27. Ghosh S, Das S, Chowdhury R  Effect of pre-pyrolysis biotreatment of banana pseudo-stem  using synergistic microbial consortium: role in deoxygenation and enhancement of yield of pyro-oil. Energy Convers Manag 195:114 –124 28. Dash A, Kumar S, Singh RK  Thermolysis of medical waste  to liquid fuel using semi batch reactor. Waste and biomass valorization 6:507 –514 29. Shah J, Jan MR  Thermo-catalytic pyrolysis of polystyrene in the presence of zinc bulk catalysts. J Taiwan Inst Chem Eng 45:2494 –2500 30. Martynis, M., Mulyazmi, Winanda, E., & Harahap, A. N. . Thermal Pyrolysis of Polypropylene Plastic Waste into Liquid Fuel: Reactor Performance Evaluation. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 543, 012047. doi:10.1088/1757-899x/543/1/012047 31. Osman AI, Farrell C, Al-Muhtaseb AH, Al-Fatesh AS, Harrison J, Rooney DW  Pyrolysis kinetic modelling of abundant plastic waste  and in-situ emission monitoring. Environ Sci Eur 32:1 –12 32. Debnath B, Chowdhury R, Ghosh SK  An analysis of e-waste recycling technologies from the chemical engineering perspective. In: In Waste Management and Resource Efficiency . Springer, Singapore 33. Honus, S., Kumagai, S., Fedorko, G., Molnár, V., & Yoshioka, T. . Pyrolysis gases produced from individual and mixed PE, PP, PS, PVC, and PET —Part I: Production and physical properties. Fuel, 221, 346–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2018.02.074 34. Dharmaraj S, Ashokkumar V, Pandiyan R, Munawaroh HSH, Chew KW, Chen WH, Ngamcharussrivichai C  Pyrolysis: an effective technique for degradation of COVID-19 medical wastes. Chemosphere 275:130092Circular Economy and Sustainability 35. Yousef S, Eimontas J, Stri ūgas N, Abdelnaby MA  Pyrolysis kinetic behaviour and TG-FTIR-GC – MS analysis of coronavirus face masks. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 156:105118 36. Lee SB, Lee J, Tsang YF, Kim YM, Jae J, Jung SC, Park YK  Production of value-added aromatics from wasted COVID-19 mask via catalytic pyrolysis. Environ Pollut 283:117060 37. Jung S, Lee S, Dou X, Kwon EE  Valorization of disposable COVID-19 mask through the thermo- chemical process. Chem Eng J 405:126658 38. Aragaw TA, Mekonnen BA  Current plastics pollution threats due to COVID-19 and its possible mitigation techniques: a waste-to-energy conversion via Pyrolysis. Environmental Systems Research 10: 1–11 39. Al-Salem SM, Lettieri P  Kinetic study of high-density polyethylene  pyrolysis. Chem Eng Res Des 88:1599 –1606 40. Adeniyi AG, Ighalo JO  Simulation of low density polyethylene  pyrolysis and optimisation of pyro-oil yield. Int Polym Process 35:229 –235 41. Das P, Tiwari P  Valorization of packaging plastic waste by slow pyrolysis. Resour Conserv Recycl 128:69 –77 42. Debnath B, Saha I, Mukherjee T, Mitra S, Das A, Das A  Sorbents from waste materials: a circular economic approach. In: Sorbents Materials for Controlling Environmental Pollution . Elsevier 43. Mukherjee, A., Debnath, B., & Ghosh, S. K. . Carbon nanotubes as a resourceful product derived from waste plastic —a review. Waste Management and Resource Efficiency, 915-934 44. Halog, A., & Anieke, S. . A review of circular economy studies in developed countries and its potential adoption in developing countries. Circular Economy and Sustainability, 1-22 45. Rudraenvsolution.com. . Retrieved 20 July 2021, from http://www.rudraenvsolution.com/images/ rudrainfo.pdf 46. Pant KK, Naik SN, & Dwivedi U  A process and two-step catalytic reactor system for the production of liquid hydrocarbons from plastic waste  47. IIT Delhi. . Retrieved 21 July 2021, from https://www.facebook.com/IITDelhi/posts/ 4135105469871145 48. Sivagami K, Divyapriya G, Selvaraj R, Madhiyazhagan P, Sriram N, Nambi I  Catalytic pyrolysis of polyolefin and multilayer packaging based waste plastics: a pilot scale study. Process Saf Environ Prot 149: 497–506 49. Debnath B, Chowdhury R, Ghosh SK  Sustainability of metal recovery from E-waste. Frontiers of environmental science & engineering 12:1 –12 50. Ellsworth, B. . Canadian firm turns non-recyclable plastics to fuel. Retrieved 21 July 2021, from https://www.aa.com.tr/en/asia-pacific/canadian-firm-turns-non-recyclable-plastics-to-fuel/1556029#:~:text= TRENTON%2C%20Canada ,fuel%20the%20company's%20 truck%20fleet. 51. Cecchin, A., Salomone, R., Deutz, P., Raggi, A., & Cutaia, L. . What is in a name? The rising star of the circular economy as a resource-related concept for sustainable development. Circular Economy and Sustainability, 1 –15Circular Economy and Sustainability 

