Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Resources, Conservation & Recycling journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/resconrec Full length article Zero waste manufacturing: A framework and review of technology, research, and implementation barriers for enabling a circular economy transition inSingapore Piya Kerdlapa,⁎, Jonathan Sze Choong Lowb, Seeram Ramakrishnaa aNational University of Singapore, 21 Lower Kent Ridge Road, 119077, Singapore bSingapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, 2 Fusionopolis Way, 138634, Singapore ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Industrial ecologyIndustrial symbiosisWaste management Sustainable manufacturing Industry 4.0ABSTRACT Zero waste manufacturing  is a concept to support countries transition to a circular economy by devel- oping manufacturing technologies and systems that eliminate waste across entire waste value chains to the fullest extent possible through reuse and recycling. Implementation of ZWM, particularly in dense urban settings such as Singapore, presents challenges for stakeholders, which stem from issues related to land scarcity, pro-ductivity, and labor shortage. A framework to address these challenges is proposed comprising six themes of design for zero waste, smart waste audit and reduction planning, smart waste collection, high-value mixed waste processing, collaborative platform for industrial symbiosis, and waste to resource conversion and recycling. Asystematic literature review is used to examine industry technologies and research across the six themes to determine how the technologies can support ZWM. The research reveals that a variety of mature waste mea- surement, collection, and conversion technologies can be integrated through internet-of-things applications anda collaborative platform for industrial symbiosis to support Singapore and other countries in developing a ZWMecosystem. This research examines the technical limitations of implementing ZWM technologies in dense urban settings using Singapore as a case study. Future areas of research are then proposed to overcome the im- plementation barriers so that ZWM can be enabled. 1. Introduction Transitioning to a circular economy has drawn signi ﬁcant attention from countries across the world as a new pathway for mitigating the growing volumes of waste that is coupled with today ’s economic growth. The predominant linear “take, make, and dispose ”economic development model has resulted in ineﬃ cient use of resources that threatens the stability of natural ecosystems and survival of humanity. More recently, the unsustainable nature of the linear economic system has gained even greater attention due toChina ’s decision in late 2017 to implement a ban against imports of 24 categories of waste from the rest the world. A year later, other countriesin Asia such as India, Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam have followed the same initiative by implementing their own waste import bans and tightening restrictions. This has forced nations such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and Japan to urgently rethink their waste management practices. Global municipal solid waste  generation is estimated at 2.01 billion tonnes per year and by 2050 it isexpected to increase to approximately 3.4 billion tonnes per year . A majority of the global waste ends up in land ﬁlls, open dumps, oceans, or other parts of the environment due to sub- optimal waste management systems and low recycling rates around the world. Only 7% of global plastic waste was recycled ( National Geographic, 2017 ) while for electronic wastes, it was estimated that only 20% of the global total is documented to have been collected and recycled properly . Strategies are therefore needed that prioritize reducing material consumption levels and break awayfrom conventional waste management in a linear economy and transi- tion to a circular economy where wastes are reduced and reused as resources across multiple supply chains at every opportunity ( Young et al., 2010 ). Singapore is working towards becoming a zero waste nation as the country is faced with the similar global challenge of ﬁguring out the next destination to put its growing amounts of waste. As outlined in the Sustainable Singapore Blueprint by the Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources , the country is prioritizing development https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104438 Received 22 August 2018; Received in revised form 31 March 2019; Accepted 2 August 2019⁎Corresponding author. E-mail address: piyakerdlap@u.nus.edu .Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 Available online 20 September 2019 0921-3449/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. T of eﬃcient waste collection, management, recycling, and disposal sys- tems ( Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources, Government of Singapore, 2015 ). As an a ﬄuent and highly urbanized country with very little land available for use, Singapore is highly reliant on its four waste-to-energy plants to incinerate its non-recyclable wastes. The in- cineration bottom ash and non-incinerable wastes are stored at its ﬁrst and only o ﬀshore land ﬁll on Semakau island. Space on Semakau island will quickly disappear as the land ﬁll is expected to max out by 2035, a decade sooner than the original 2045 projection. The population andaﬄuence of the city-state is expected to climb which will correspond- ingly increase future waste generation. As shown in Fig. 1, in 2018, Singapore generated 7.7 million tonnes of waste with 60% of the vo- lume recycled and 40% either incinerated or sent to a land ﬁll. The steady rise in recycling rates from 47% in 2003 to 60% in 2018 has helped Singapore mitigate waste challenges. However, the rate ofwaste generated has also increased similarly and the amount of waste sent to the incinerators and land ﬁll has not shown much improvement. In parallel to the waste challenges, Singapore has prioritized ad- vancing its manufacturing sector which contributes to 20% of its gross domestic product  and 14% of total employment ( Ministry of Trade and Industry, 2017). To advance the manufacturing sector, Sin-gapore has adopted industry 4.0 technologies as a pathway that is ex- pected to add USD27 billion in total manufacturing output, boost labor productivity by 30%, and create 22,000 new jobs by 2024 ( Boston Consulting Group, 2017). Industry 4.0 is the fourth stage of the in-dustrial revolution where computers, automation technologies, and manufacturing systems integrate together into cyber-physical systems that monitor the physical processes of a factory and make its own de- cisions ( Zheng et al., 2018 , Lopes de Sousa et al., 2018, Lee et al., 2015 ). The two-way communication of data between the components, machines and digital devices results in networked manufacturing sys- tems that are intelligently cross-linked across all hierarchical levels of a value chain . To catalyze the adoption of I4.0, the Government of Singapore has committed USD2.4 billion under theﬁve-year Research, Innovation and Enterprise 2020 plan to support advancements of technological capabilities in the manufacturing andengineering sectors . Global ex- periences have shown however that although advancements in manu-facturing result in rising living standards, it also brings about adverse environmental impacts due to unsustainable consumption and pro- duction patterns . Zero waste manufacturing  o ﬀers a solution to Singapore and other countries ’waste management and manufacturing objectives. The concept focuses on developing manufacturing systems that eliminatewaste across entire value chains to the fullest extent possible byminimizing waste generation and maximizing the use of wastes as re-sources in other supply chains. In ZWM, waste is viewed as a manu- facturing value chain where waste is generated, collected, and recycled. ZWM aims to improve waste reduction and recovery across multiple supply chains and stakeholders to maximize resource e ﬃciency. The holistic life cycle approach of ZWM can address the dual ob- jectives of future advancements in manufacturing and waste reduction. However, an overarching challenge of achieving ZWM is that as global manufacturing moves through the fourth industrial revolution, the di- versity and volume of waste will continue to evolve and stakeholders along the waste value chain may not be able to keep up at the same pace . To identify the technologies that stakeholders can implement to achieve ZWM, this study proposes a holistic framework comprising six technology themes that aim to mi-tigate waste generation across the life cycle stages of production and consumption systems. These six themes include:  design for zero waste  smart waste audit and reduction planning  smart waste collection  high-value mixed waste processing  collaborative platform for industrial symbiosis  waste to resource conversion and recycling. As shown in Fig. 2, the six themes of the ZWM framework are connected together by addressing speci ﬁc technical needs of stake- holders across the manufacturing waste value chain: producers who arealso the waste generators, waste collectors, and waste to resource converters or recyclers. The ways in which all six themes support the three major waste value chain stakeholders move towards ZWM is outlined in Table 1. Integrated together, the collection of technologies under all six themes can minimize waste along the whole waste value chain. The ZWM framework o ﬀers both environmental and economic bene ﬁts for a country ’s manufacturing sector. Implementing technologies under the six themes allows manufacturing companies to reduce the volume of waste generated and prevent waste from entering the land ﬁll. Waste reduction and recycling through ZWM reduces greenhouse gas emis-sions, energy consumption, and reliance on virgin materials which translates to economic cost savings. Previous studies have reviewed how the zero waste concept and diﬀerent technologies have been applied in di ﬀerent stages of produc- tion and waste management systems . However, there is a need for studies to examine the technical challenges stakeholders of the waste value chain - waste generators, waste Fig. 1. Waste disposal and recycling in Singapore between 2003 and 2018 .P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 2 collectors, and waste to resource converters - may face in implementing existing technologies to meet their zero waste goals and transition to a circular economy. Certain ZWM technologies may face barriers during implementation in dense urban settings. There is a need to identify the technical challenges waste stakeholders operating in dense urban set- tings may face as per capita waste generation is greater for countries or regions with high urbanization rates  and it is projected that more than two-thirds of the world ’s population will be residing in urban centers by 2050 . The objectiveof this research is to therefore answer the questions, what are the latest industry technologies under each theme of ZWM and what are the challenges that hinder implementation of these technologies to achieve the goals of ZWM in Singapore and other highly urbanized regions around the world? This study ﬁrst used a systematic review approach to identify and review the state-of-the-art technologies and research lit-erature under the six themes of the ZWM framework. Based on the thematic review, the feasibility of implementing the technologies is examined using Singapore as a case study for a high income and highly Fig. 2. Overview of zero waste manufacturing framework. Table 1 Stakeholder bene ﬁts under each theme of ZWM. Theme Stakeholder Support the theme provides to stakeholder Design for zero waste Generators Products can be designed and manufactured that use less materials or can be reused which minimizes waste generation. Collectors Products can be designed for disassembly allowing for easy collection, sorting and thereafter, reuse or waste recycling. Converters Products can be designed to be broken down more easily into sub-components and materials so that they can be separated to facilitate e ﬃcient recycling. Smart waste audit and reduction planningGenerators Automated waste auditing and reporting processes can e ﬃciently estimate the magnitude and composition of waste generated to provide the necessary data for managing and mitigating waste. Collectors Data from smart waste audits can be used by waste collectors to know the magnitude and type of waste di ﬀerent entities are generating in real time and therefore know where and when to collect a speci ﬁc type of waste that is desired. Converters Diﬀerent waste to resource converters can use smart waste audits for real-time information about the magnitude and type of waste being generated at di ﬀerent sites and then quickly identify who to engage with to use the speci ﬁc waste. Smart waste collection Generators Being connected to a smart waste collection system with sensors and smart waste bins allows waste generators tohave their wastes collected more e ﬃciently and avoids unmanageable waste over ﬂow. Collectors Data from smart waste collection systems help optimize waste collection routes that maximize the number of fullbins collected which improves utilization of assets  and manpower and minimizes collection time and costs. Converters Waste to resource converters connected to a smart waste collection system can have real-time information about when wastes will arrive at their facilities which can support in planning recycling operations and predict incoming materials. High-value mixed waste processing Generators Automated sorting and segregation allow for recovery of valuable materials from waste generators that was disposedin a single mixed stream due to lack of capacity or infrastructure to do source separation. Collectors Waste collectors can collect mixed waste streams and have it sorted to recover materials that can then be sent toother facilities for waste to resource conversion. Converters Automated sorting and segregation of mixed wastes before recycling increases waste to resource conversion yields. Collaborative platform for industrial symbiosisGenerators Waste generators can be matched with companies that desire their wastes for reuse or recycling. Collectors Collectors can become logistic service providers for companies connected on a collaborative platform for waste toresource matching and exchanges. Data from the collaborative platform can identify for collectors where theirservices may be needed. Converters The collaborative platform can provide information to waste to resource converters about which companies have thewaste that speciﬁ c converters desire for reuse and recycling. Waste to resource conversion and recyclingGenerators Waste generators will have technology options for recovering value from their waste materials instead of disposing itto a land ﬁll or incinerator. Collectors Collectors can provide the service of delivering wastes to the appropriate waste to resource converter. Converters Converters will have the technology needed to convert waste to resources and then sell the recycled materials as afeedstock for another supply chain.P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 3 urbanized city. Then, future areas of research in ZWM are proposed to address the implementation barriers identi ﬁed. The intended audience of this research includes government decision makers, manufacturingcompanies and associations, waste collectors and converters, research institutions in Singapore and other countries and cities that seek to understand how current ZWM technologies can be applied to achieve advanced manufacturing and waste reduction goals. The ﬁndings of this research can be used to develop a roadmap that outlines the strategicresearch and development direction for building a ZWM ecosystem in Singapore and other urban settings. This review is designed to en- courage researchers, businesses, and decision-makers implement stra- tegies and activities for moving towards ZWM. 2. Materials and methods This research applies the systematic literature review  meth- odology to conduct a review process that is replicable and transparent . Once the research questions were es- tablished, the systematic procedure outlined in Fig. 3 was used to ﬁnd and select relevant studies.Apart from the academic literature, grey literature sources were included in this study as they provide updated sources of information regarding technologies applied in practice. These pieces of evidence suggest their real-world applicability to instances of manufacturing and waste-related issues. 2.1. Question formulation The primary review question formulated was: What are the latest industry technologies in each theme of ZWM that can be implemented together to achieve both manufacturing and waste management goals in Singapore and similar cities? The secondary questions developed that support the primary question were: 1 How do the technologies under each theme contribute to achieving ZWM? 2 What future areas of research should be pursued to address the limitations of the technologies identi ﬁed under the themes of the ZWM framework? 2.2. Locating studies Two decisions were made in the selection of the search engines and the keywords. Scopus and ScienceDirect were used to identify scienti ﬁc papers related to the six themes of ZWM. Scopus was selected because itis the largest citation and abstract database while ScienceDirect was selected because the database contains many of the journals with stu- dies that are related to the topics being explored in this review. The general Google search engine was also used to ﬁnd grey literature sources such as business reports, news articles, and company informa-tion about technologies and businesses related to the ZWM themes thathave already been implemented in the global market. Search keywords were determined through a two-step process. First, the six ZWM themes were used in the search engines. Then, related concepts and synonyms that frequently appeared in the ﬁrst search and were related to the research question were then used to narrow the search into a ﬁnal search string. The keywords for the search strings used in the search engines are listed in Table 2 . For the theme of waste to resource conversion and recycling, the search criteria were narrowed down to focus primarily on technologies for recycling wastes in the food, paper, plastics, and electronics sectors because those waste categories present the greatest opportunities for recycling in Singapore. In 2018, Singapore recycled only 56% of paper and cardboard wastes, 17% of food waste, and 4% of plastic waste . For electronic wastes, the National Environment Agency  reported that Singa-pore generated around 60,000 tonnes in 2014. This made Singapore the second-highest generator of electronic wastes in the East and Southeast Asia region . Fig. 3. Systematic literature review procedure. Table 2 Keywords used in search strings for ZWM themes. Concept Search string Smart waste audit “smart waste audit ”OR“waste audit ” Smart waste collection “smart waste collection ”OR“smart waste ”OR“smart waste bin ” High value mixed waste processing “high value mixed waste processing ”OR“mixed waste processing ” Product recycling “product recycling ”OR“product remanufacturing ” Food waste recycling “food waste recycling ”OR“food waste recovery ”OR“food waste to energy ” Paper and cardboard recycling “paper recycling technology ”OR“waste paper recycling technology ”OR“cardboard recycling technology ”OR“waste cardboard recycling technology ” Plastic recycling “plastic recycling technology ”OR“waste plastic recycling technology ” Electronic waste recycling “e-waste recycling technology ”OR“ewaste recycling technology ”OR“electronic waste recycling technology ” Design for zero waste “design for zero waste ”OR“design for disassembly ”OR“modular product technology ” Collaborative platform for industrial symbiosis “industrial symbiosis network ”OR“industrial symbiosis tool ”OR“industrial symbiosis platform ”P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 4 2.3. Study selection and criteria The main criteria for shortlisting the search results under each of the six themes for further analysis was technology which included hard- ware, software, and services. Only studies and other information pub- lished in 2008 and onwards were included to obtain contemporary research and state-of-the-art technologies applied in practice. Each type of information source was screened in a di ﬀerent manner to ﬁlter out false positive results from the automated search engines as follows: 1 Scienti ﬁc studies: The title and the abstract were screened 2 Business reports: The executive summaries and introductions were screened 3 Company websites: Homepages were screened 4 News articles: The title and the ﬁrst three paragraphs of the article were screened Table 3 lists the criteria developed to determine topic relevance before further detailed selection. The screening determined which studies, reports, or news articles were directly relevant to the scope of this research and would gothrough a full text review. As shown in Table 4, criteria were then developed to ensure the information was relevant for answering theresearch question. The shortlist resulted in 52 research papers, business reports, web- sites, and news articles that went through a full text review. The subsequent sections of this research describe the ﬁndings of the thematic analysis of six pre-de ﬁned themes of ZWM and their tech- nologies. Section 4discusses how the technologies in the themes can be integrated to achieve ZWM and examines the limitations the ZWM technologies may face during implementation in dense urban settings. Section 5proposes future areas of research in ZWM that are needed to overcome the limitations of the technologies examined in this study. 3. State-of-the-art technologies in zero waste manufacturing Each theme of ZWM addresses a group of technologies needed for waste generators, waste collectors, and waste to resource converters to move towards ZWM. Through the thematic review, technologies areidentiﬁed that the ZWM stakeholders could adopt to overcome their unique waste management challenges. An excel spreadsheet that clas-siﬁes the ZWM technologies and studies reviewed in this research is provided in the supporting information. 3.1. Design for zero waste Design for zero waste focuses on designing products that use less materials and/or are easier to disassemble. This reduces the amount of waste generated, makes it easier to collect used parts, and makes it more feasible to recover parts or materials from the product at its end of life. In the manufacturing industry, design for disassembly  and additive manufacturing  are able to achieve this goal. DfD is a design strategy that considers the future need to disassemble a product for repair, refurbishment, and recycling. Through DfD, valuable parts and materials that still have value can be easily recovered and used in the same or di ﬀerent products. AM technology constructs products by directly joining materials layer by layer following a digital designtemplate. AM products can be developed to more precise design spe- ciﬁcations and shapes from start to ﬁnish, which helps eliminate waste generated along the manufacturing process, compared to conventionalmanufacturing. 3.1.1. Design for disassembly Ameliorating product design during the development phase can increase the recovery rate of products and their materials. DfD guide- lines state that maximizing a product ’s ability to be disassembled can be achieved during the design stage by looking at how to reduce thenumber of product parts, lower product disassembly costs, shorten disassembly time, and solve all the existing problems in disassembly . For DfD products to be successful and well received by customers, it is recommended that they meet 14 di ﬀerent char- acteristics provided by Wang et al.  . To support decision-making in DfD, Low  et al.  proposed a tool based on modular product architecture. Products with modular architectures are a notable example of DfD because they can be disassembled into a number of subassemblies,parts, and components. Each subassembly can be considered a module that can be independently created and then used again in other productTable 3 Inclusion and exclusion criteria for title and abstract screening. Attribute Inclusion Exclusion Field of study Field of study must be related to waste management and recycling, manufacturing, and environmental sustainability.Field of study is not related to waste management and recycling, manufacturing, and environmental sustainability (e.g. policy, ﬁnance, urban management and planning). Context within ﬁeld Title/abstract contains cues on technology, systems, and processes to improve waste and resource management, reduction, and recycling in manufacturing industry practices.Title/abstract contains cues of related topics , butdo not directly discuss applications to improving environmentalsustainability in manufacturing practices. Subject of discussion Title/abstract has to include discussion or description of the technology, systems, or process applied in improving waste and resource management,reduction and recycling in manufacturing processes. The technology,system, or process should elaborate on the functions and should beimplementable or has been implemented.Title/abstract discusses principles and fundamental zero waste concepts; history of zero waste; zero waste cases analysis with no relation to technology, systems, or processes that support the objectives of ZWM. Table 4 Subject matter relevance criteria for full text review. Type of paper Content pro ﬁle of paper Paper must contain Conceptual Conceptual description of technology. Yet to present evidence of implementation.Concept of the technology, demonstrable by the logic and design and applicable to ZWM themes. Review and trends Description of industry trends and issues about a type of technology applicable to ZWM.Details about the development status, industry standards, challenges and gaps, of technology applicable to ZWM. Empirical Description of how the technology works, what it can achieve, with evidence of successful testing or implementation.Details about the functions, processes, and outputs of the technology and the relationships between the steps, and what issues the technology solves.P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 5 systems . Manufacturing products with modular architectures allows parts to be easily broken down into a number of standardized building blocks, which can be rearranged to create di ﬀerent con ﬁgurations and variants ( Rios et al., 2015 ). Parts of modular products are also easily replaceable. One ex- ample of a modular product is Hewlett Packard ’s HPZ1 computer as illustrated in Fig. 4 . The HPZ1 monitor contains all the machine’ s workings and all hardware components can be removed for repair without the need fortools . Modular construction of buildings has been shown to achieve the beneﬁts of DfD. Modular buildings make it easier to deconstruct them and recover the materials for other product supply chains, as opposed tocompletely demolishing them ( Kamali et al., 2018; Kamali and Hewage, 2017 ). The company Yorkon manufactures modular components of buildings o ﬀ-site and connects all the pieces of the ﬁnal building at the determined location as shown in Fig. 5. Modular construction does not necessarily restrict the ﬁnished de- sign and can save money and time due to less disruption and wastesgenerated compared to onsite construction of a building from scratch. 3.1.2. Additive manufacturing AM technology produces objects from a three-dimensional  model by joining materials layer by layer, directly from raw materialssuch as metal and plastic in powder, liquid, sheet, or ﬁlament form without the need for molds, tools, or dies. AM builds products to moreprecise design speci ﬁcations which reduces waste material generatedduring product fabrication compared to traditional manufacturing . 3D printing is the most well-known type of AM that allows products to be engineered to a speci ﬁc order from the customer and spare-parts can be produced to precise speci ﬁcations ( Kreiger et al., 2014 ). 3D printed products are more ﬂexible in terms of customization capabilities. This enables manufacturing to happen outside of a factory and closer to the point where the product will be consumed ( Kellens et al., 2017). Some multinational companies have invested in AM forenhancing their business. General Electric invested USD50 million in a factory that 3D prints 35,000 fuel nozzles each year because AM technology uses less material than conventional manufacturing pro- cesses which reduces production costs ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2013). Several shoe companies such as Adidas, Nike, Feetz,and United Nude, are now using 3D printing technology to give cus- tomers shoes that are custom made for them right at the store ( CNN, 2017 ). 3D printed shoes use the exact amount of materials required and can help avoid generation of waste materials that typically occurs in conventional shoe production. Design for zero waste contributes to building a ZWM ecosystem because it helps prevent waste generation right at the start of product life cycles. Making products that are easier to disassemble, re- manufacture, and refurbish increases opportunities for products andtheir components to be reused in the same or di ﬀerent product life cycle. Conducting research to advance design for zero waste will sup-port product reuse, upgrade, and maintenance resulting in reduced consumption of raw materials and energy. 3.2. Smart waste audit and reduction planning Smart waste audits comprise hardware and software solutions that analyze waste volumes, automatically segregate waste, and assess op- portunities for waste reduction and diversion though recycling or reuse. Current hardware research and development has been focused on waste bins that automatically segregate waste by analyzing the material content through cameras and sensors ( Bin-e, 2017 ;CleanRobotics, 2016 ). On the software side, smart waste audits are carried out through online tools that use data analytics to review waste generation data, existing waste collection practices and costs, and current levels of onsite recycling . These digital tools then identify opportu- nities for increasing waste recycling and cost saving opportunities.Gershman, Brickner & Bratton, Inc.  developed an internet-based tool called Smart Engine that identi ﬁes cost-saving opportunities for diﬀerent workplaces. The tool utilizes an extensive database of waste and recycling information from GBB ’s 20 years of experience in the industry and national databases. After the tool was developed andtested, many businesses conducted their waste audits through Smar- tEngine . SMARTWaste is another online smart waste auditing tool developed by BRE. This toolwas designed to simplify reporting for environmental compliance in construction projects by managing environmental data in construction and allows users to input the data from their projects. Users have re- ported that SMARTWaste helped reduce onsite waste generation by 40% . Smart waste audits and reduction planning technologies contribute to building a ZWM ecosystem because they enable waste audits to be carried out more e ﬃciently. Advanced hardware and software solutions for collecting and analyzing waste generation data at di ﬀerent sites reduce the time and costs to complete waste audits and measure the potential for waste reduction and recycling. 3.3. Smart waste collection Current trends in smart waste collection have resulted from new technology enablers that include geographic information systems , data access networks, sensors, and Internet-of-Things  ( Shukla and Shukla, 2017 ). The global smart waste collection technology market is Fig. 4. Internal design of the HP Z1 computer. Fig. 5. Example of a modular building by Yorkon ( Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013 ).P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 6 expected to grow from USD57.6 million in 2016 to more than USD223 million in 2025 . Companies leading in commercialized technology solutions for smart waste collection areBigbelly Solar; Cognito Tech Solutions; Compology; Ecube Labs; Enevo; IoTsens; SmartBin; SmartUp Cities; System Level Solutions; Urbiotica; and WAVIoT. Modern smart waste collection systems include an integrated net- work of sensors, smart waste bins, trucks, maps, and a data manage- ment center all integrated together to maximize e ﬃciency of waste collection . They are designed to solve the current complicated and costly process composed of ine ﬃcient routes serviced by aﬂeet of trucks on disconnected and arbitrary schedules ( Ecube Labs, 2017a ). As a result, collection costs can represent nearly two- thirds of waste management expenditures ( Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton Inc., 2015 ). In smart waste collection systems, sensors are set up at waste bins connected to a remote network. The sensors measurebinﬁll levels and send the data to a central database that uses data analytics to monitor sensors and optimize collection routes by skippingempty or low traﬃ c bins . Algorithms are then used to conduct predictive analyses of data history to estimate ﬁll levels in advance. The results are then used to plan out optimized collection routes for waste hauling trucks that minimize pick-up points and the number of vehicles dispatched. Collection routes are sent to truck dri- vers through a mobile phone application in real time and can be up- dated by GPS navigation. The parameterization of the multitude of factors such as distances between points, facility options, and proces- sing costs is necessary to accurately model the complexities of multi- plicities and spatial heterogeneities in municipal solid waste systems .Fig. 6 illustrates components of a smart waste collection system. The fundamental component of smart bins are sensors that can be attached to any type of waste bin and continuously measure ﬁll level, temperature, and bin tilt using ultrasonic wireless technology. Sensorsare also capable of detecting all types of solid and liquid materials such as general waste, glass, waste oil, and lubricants. They can also perform geopositional tracking to ensure that owners always know the location of their containers . Wireless ultrasonic sensors also serve as a communication node that send waste bin information to acentral data server through a cellular network. Future sensor tech- nology will be able to measure humidity, motion, or weight of the bin to provide better data about the composition of waste at di ﬀerent sites. Other larger and more complex smart waste bins exist that provideservices beyond ﬁll level monitoring and wireless data transfer. One example is the Bigbelly smart bin, as shown in Fig. 7. The bin is powered by solar photovoltaic electricity, can compact waste within the receptacle to reduce volume and over ﬂow, and is equipped with a Wi-Fi unit that can serve as a public internet hotspot . The waste compacting feature helps reduce the col- lection trips needed to empty the bin. More advanced smart bins are being built with capabilities to automatically sort waste deposited into the bin, which would reduce labor, time, and costs in waste manage- ment . This waste sorting function is based on a combi- nation of mechanical and electronical components, and software withelements of arti ﬁcial intelligence. Data systems in smart waste collection monitor and optimize daily selection of waste bins to be emptied and calculate the routes and schedules accordingly. Powered by information and communicationstechnology infrastructure, data about bin ﬁll level, locations of bins and trucks, road tra ﬃc congestion, time of day, and other factors are col- lected from all smart waste bins. Algorithms then process this data to calculate the most e ﬃcient collection routes to be taken ( Ecube Labs, 2017a ). The data system then transmits the optimized collection routes directly to the drivers ’mobile phone or tablet computer. These online tools enable managers of smart waste collection systems to monitor alloperations in real time from either a desktop computer or remotely on a mobile device. Smart waste collection online tools are designed to learn Fig. 6. Components of a smart waste collection system . Fig. 7. Bigbelly smart waste bin.P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 7 from experience and can make decisions based not only on the daily waste level status but also on future waste forecasts, traﬃ c congestion, balanced cost-e ﬃciency functions, and other factors that humans are unable to foresee. The advanced data systems in smart waste collection enable optimized selection of trashcans to be collected which improves collection e ﬃciency and reduces operation costs. Many cities across the world have already implemented smart waste collection systems in urban management programs in tandem with IoT technology advancements . Companies such as Ecube Labs and Bigbelly Solar have already successfully deployed their smartwaste collection systems technologies at universities, city streets, train stations, and airports in Dublin, Los Angeles, Melbourne, Seoul, and Washington D.C . These projects have resulted in waste collection cost savings as high as 85%. Smart waste collection technologies contribute to building a ZWM ecosystem because waste producers, collectors, and converters becomedigitally connected to enhance waste management operations. Waste management assets such as collection trucks are able to perform more eﬃciently because they can be dispatched along a route with bins at ﬁll levels that are maxed out or near maximum capacity, as opposed todriving through a collection route with bins at low ﬁll levels. Data from smart waste management systems and their components can be used tocreate strategies that identify the best route and time of day during the week that is best for collection. This reduces the amount of labor, trucks deployed, and fuel required to carry out waste collection operations. Eﬃcient collection of recyclables through smart waste collection sys- tems will also enable more conversion of waste to resources for othersupply chains. 3.4. High-value mixed waste processing Mixed waste processing  uses a combination of new and existing technologies at large facilities to sort out the recyclables from streams of mixed waste. The goal of high-value MWP is to achieve greater yields of recycled products that are valuable for end-users. One of the greatest challenges in achieving high-value MWP is developing technology that processes single streams of mixed waste and segregates products with very minimal contamination in a cost-e ﬀective manner. Overall, the MWP industry is moving towards large regional single-stream facilities, as opposed to small-scale operations ( Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton Inc., 2015 ). Modern MWP facilities are mature and employ demonstrated technology for processing MSW and cap- turing recyclables. Nearly all modern MWP facilities include a pre-sort to eliminate bulky or prohibitive materials, a method to open bags, and screens that remove ﬁne materials . Advancements in MWP are expected to be primarily focused on im-provements in identi ﬁcation and segregation technologies such as op- tical sensors that can target and separate speci ﬁc plastics. Optical units in modern material recovery facilities  are mostly used to re- cover polyethylene terephthalate  and high-density polyethylene . However, optical units can also be used to recover other re- cyclable mixed plastics, frequently referred to as plastics grade #3 through #7. Table 5 provides details about state-of-the-art technologies used across all processes for MWP. Combining MRFs and MWP systems have potential to signi ﬁcantly increase both volume and total revenue from recycling materials. Routing MRF residue to the MWP facility could allow for greater potential of reprocessing andrecovery of recyclables. The MWP facility could also serve as the con-solidation point for all the non-recovered material output streams which would improve e ﬃciency. This would allow the MRF to still recover high quality recyclables while the MWP facility would recoveradditional recyclables of adequate quality. High-value MWP contributes to building a ZWM ecosystem by in- creasing recovery rates of valuable materials from mixed waste streamsand reduces the magnitude of waste sent to the land ﬁll. Increasing MWP allows for greater segregation of waste that can be reused as re- sources in other supply chains. Even after residents have separated out recycled commodities, the average MSW stream may contain up to half of the total volume of recyclables, and in many cases more than half. Conducting research to improve high-value MWP will help reduce fu- ture land ﬁll costs. The costs of land ﬁlling waste will only rise due to the rapidly declining availability of land ﬁll space. Another bene ﬁt of im- proving high-value MWP is that the technology does not require con- sumer participation, education, or sorting behavior. 3.5. Collaborative platform for industrial symbiosis Collaborative platforms for industrial symbiosis are an ongoing ﬁeld of research focused on developing digital technologies that identify suitable waste to resource matches and facilitates those exchanges be- tween di ﬀerent companies in a speci ﬁc area or region ( Fraccascia and Yazan, 2018 ). This promotes industrial symbiosis, an association be- tween two or more industrial facilities or companies where wastes and by-products of one supply chain become resources for another. These platforms function similarly to social networking platforms such as LinkedIn, Uber, and Airbnb where people ’s demands are matched with supplies of resources and products. Currently, several internet-basedplatforms exist that facilitate industrial symbiosis. Industry organiza- tions or facilitator companies usually o ﬀer these internet-based plat- form tools that allow businesses to discuss synergies through symbiosisin a safe and common environment . Plat- forms that are commercialized or under development usually include aninterface where users input data about the waste and resources they have available or desire; a database for storing all the information about the diﬀerent users and companies; and algorithms for matching dif- ferent users based on their waste and resource needs ( Low et al., 2018; Raabe et al., 2017; Song et al., 2015 ).Table 6 provides details that distinguish each of the di ﬀerent existing collaborative platforms de- signed to facilitate industrial symbiosis. Expected future development of these platforms include software upgrades that use advanced data analytics and models to perform au-tomated waste recycle and reuse matches. This would allow human labor to focus on veri ﬁcation and supervision instead of time-con- suming research and analysis. Research is being done to upgrade theseplatforms to enable material informatics. This uses data mining and machine learning processes to analyze large ensembles of primary and waste material data to deliver the knowledge to end-users that require them for product development . Another area of research for this technology is development of analytical toolsthat calculate the environmental and economic bene ﬁts of the potential waste to resource exchanges and material processing systems using lifecycle assessment . Future research is also being done to digitally connect all stakeholders involved in ZWM andhave them interact on a cyber-physical environment as illustrated in Fig. 8. A collaborative platform for industrial symbiosis contributes to building a ZWM ecosystem because these online platforms provide the necessary intelligence to connect all types of organizations to trade wastes and by-products between each other in an economically favor- able manner. Manufacturing companies usually lack the knowledge about what kind of wastes can be converted into resources. Even if the companies have the technical capacity in this area, practical concernsarise such as the business viability and the willingness of companies to become partners to carry out waste to resource exchanges.Collaborative platforms for industrial symbiosis can catalyze ZWM by providing greater knowledge about which waste and by-products can be recaptured in other product supply chains which reduces waste generation and primary resource consumption.P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 8 3.6. Waste to resource conversion and recycling 3.6.1. Food waste to energy Mature technologies for converting food waste to energy uses bio- logical, thermal, and thermochemical reactions to yield products that can be used as raw energy. Anaerobic digestion and fermentation are the biological processes employed. Thermal and thermochemical pro- cesses use incineration, pyrolysis, gasi ﬁcation, hydrothermal oxidation . The e ﬃciency of food waste to energy conversion technologies is strongly reliant on pretreatment and quality of waste. Table 7 lists the energy products and by-product of each food waste to energy technology. Each class of food waste to energy conversion technology has its own bene ﬁts and challenges. Anaerobic digestion has been successfully commercialized to generate biogas from food waste. However, it is challenged by the duration of conversion since it can take 20-40 days for the microbial reaction to be completed . Fer- mentation has demonstrated itself to be a technically feasible processfor producing ethanol from food waste. However, the overall economic viability of fermentation needs further research to determine ways to reduce the costs of converting food waste to ethanol. Waste incineration with heat recovery has been used to deal with food waste, but there are few studies that provide consistent information about the amount of energy recovered from incinerating food waste. Furthermore, food waste is not well-suited for incineration because of its high moisturecontent and contains non-combustible components. Food waste that isincinerated is usually in the general ﬂow of MSW and is not treated in a separate group. Pyrolysis and gasi ﬁcation are complex thermal pro- cesses involving chemical and physical interactions that take place at temperatures above 600 degrees Celsius in an oxygen-free environment. The syngas gas produced can be burned directly or be used as fuel for gas engines and turbines or be used as feedstock forproducing chemicals such as methanol. Similar to incineration, the speciﬁc properties of the solid waste can signi ﬁcantly a ﬀect the waste to energy gasi ﬁcation process. To date, there are not any gasi ﬁcation and pyrolysis processes that can solely deal with food waste. Hydrothermal carbonization has received more research attention because it can deal with waste streams with moisture content as high as 80 –90%. Hydro- thermal carbonization uses a wet process to convert food wastes to ahigh value energy-rich resource under autogenous pressure and low temperatures of 100 to 250 degrees Celsius. The energy-rich resource, often called hydrochar, is sterile, hygienic, and is easy to store and transport. It has been reported that the highly carbonized and energy- rich material has a composition equivalent to that of lignite coal ( Berge et al., 2011 ). Hydrothermal carbonization technology therefore o ﬀers an eﬃcient way of converting a wide variety of food wastes without the need for an energy-intensive drying process, which is a common re-quirement in other food waste to energy technologies.Table 5 State-of-the-art technologies used at MWP facilities . Technology Type of equipment used and process carried out Conveyors Rubber and metal belts are used to move materials to and from processing equipment, sort stations, and to ﬁnal storage. Modern conveyors include belt cleaning mechanisms that remove ﬁne and wet materials that tend to stay on the belt. Bag openers Mechanical parts that release materials from closed plastic trash bags without resizing or changing the contents. Most designs of bag openers allow large and unbreakable objects to pass through by exiting spring loads or other mechanisms without jamming the bag breaker. Primary shredders Hammermills, grinders, and high-speed shredders are used to reduce the size of the waste. The downside to hammermills is that they create a lot of dust andﬁnes, and do not work as well on materials such as plastic ﬁlm that does not shear or break easily. Secondary shredders Secondary shredders are used only when additional size reduction of mixed waste is needed such as in the production of materials for refused-derived fuel, densi ﬁcation, or other processes. Types of secondary shredders are high-speed, high inertia hammermills, medium-speed single rotor shredders, and low-speed shear shredders with multiple shafts and are almost always used in conjunction with primary size reduction. Screens Mechanically separate materials by size. Types of screens include vibratory screens, trommel screens, disc screens, and ballistic screens. Each screen agitates and spreads out materials to break up loosely bound items and separate smaller items from larger ones. Ferrous magnets Types of magnets currently used are belt magnets, head pulley magnets, and drum magnets. The belt magnet consists of a cleated rubber belt that travels between two non-magnetic pulleys over a central magnet that can either be a permanent magnet or an electromagnet. Head pulley magnets are permanent magnets set up as the head pulley of a conveyor. Drum magnets have non-magnetic steel covers that rotate about ﬁxed internal permanent or electromagnets. Non-ferrous magnets Eddy current separator units are commonly used as a non-ferrous magnet to separate non-ferrous metals such as aluminum and copper from a stream of materials. Air separation systems Air drum separators remove heavy or light items from the material stream, or to occasionally split high-volume streams into similar composition fractions. Optical sorting systems Optical sorting systems use near-infrared light and sensors to recognize di ﬀerent plastics at processing plans. The technology uses light to illuminate the material stream and sensors that collect the re ﬂected or transmitted light to analyze the light properties using spectrometry. The spectrometry reveals the wavelengths that are re ﬂected by the objects. Densiﬁcation systems Densi ﬁcation compacts resulting material streams from an MWP facility into a smaller, more transportable form that can be easily stored. These transportable forms include balers for recovered plastics and ﬁber or a residue compactor that presses the residue stream into a container. The two types of balers commonly used at MWP facilities are single-ram and double-ram. Table 6 Collaborative platforms for industrial symbiosis that exist or are under development. Name Distinguishing Features The Materials Marketplace Pathway 21Platform has engaged 23 large U.S. companies and facilitated 68 potential waste to resource matches, and has received several awards since 2015 . SYNERGie 4.0 International SynergiesSoftware was developed using International Synergies ’project experiences. Currently being used by industrial symbiosis practitioners in nine countries to allow users to characterize, search, and match their company ’s resources within a site and across multiple sites . Waste-to-Resources Matching Platform Singapore Institute of Manufacturing TechnologyCurrently under development and is targeting food manufacturing, consumer products, chemicals, and pharmaceuticalsectors in Singapore . SymbioSyS University of CantabriaTool is based on ICT-web systems with a large database that stores both tacit knowledge of experiences and practices andexplicit information about activities. Tool has been tested within an industrial park community consisting of 25 small andmedium sized enterprises from di ﬀerent industrial sectors .P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 9 3.6.2. Paper and cardboard Commercialized paper and cardboard recycling technologies and processes are similar across the world. The main di ﬀerence between regions, countries, and cities is the manner in which waste paper and cardboard is collected to the recycling facilities. The current practice starts with shredding collected recycled paper in pulpers and then mixing the ﬁbres with water and chemicals, which are then heated into a slurry mix . Contaminants are then removed from the slurry mix and the mix is then put onto a conveyor belt toallow the ﬁbres to bond together. Heated metal rollers then dry the paper which is then made into large rolls for new paper products. Dueto diﬀerent grades of paper, there is a limited amount of times that paper can be recycled. The length of paper ﬁbers become shorter after every round of recycling which reduces its grade. Advancements in paper and cardboard recycling technology can be achieved through improvements in process e ﬃciency at factories . This en- tails reductions in energy and chemical use at all stages of the recyclingprocess through increasing the use of heat recovery, cogeneration, self- generated biomass fuel, e ﬃcient motors, and e ﬃcient steam use. 3.6.3. Plastics Plastic recycling is currently done at large centralized facilities that take advantage of economies of scale in producing low-value products.There is strong demand for recycled plastic from manufacturing com- panies because recycled materials are a preferred choice for cost re- duction and reducing waste. State-of-the-art plastic recycling processes can be categorized under four di ﬀerent classes as shown in Fig. 9. Primary recycling is commonly known as re-extrusion and can onlyhandle clean or semi-clean scrap plastic after the contaminated parts are sorted out. This makes MSW not suitable for primary recycling because of high contamination. Secondary recycling uses screw extru- sion, injection moulding, and blow moulding to transform plastic ma- terials through mechanical means into low value products. The pro- cesses involved in secondary recycling include cutting and shredding, separating contaminants, and separating ﬂakes by ﬂoating. The ﬁnal recycled plastic product is stored and then resold after pigments and other additives have been added. Plastic strands are then extruded further to make pellets based on the requirements and then the ﬁnal products are manufactured. Tertiary recycling uses various methodssuch as pyrolysis, cracking, gasi ﬁcation, and chemolysis to recycle plastic materials by recovering monomers from plastic solid wastethrough depolymerization. Tertiary recycling can be separated into two types of techniques, chemical and thermal recycling. Quaternary re- cycling incinerates plastic waste that has already gone through primary, secondary, and tertiary recycling to recover energy. This method is only done when there is no other way to dispose plastic waste that is no longer valuable in other supply chains. Incineration of plastic waste emits harmful air pollutants such as carbon dioxide, nitrous oxides, sulfur dioxide, volatile organic compounds, particulate matter, parti- culate-bound heavy metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, poly- chlorinated dibenzofurans, and dioxins. Recycled plastic materials can be used in a variety of products to replace ceramic, wood, and metals because plastics are very functional, hygienic, light, and economical. Recycled plastics are typically used to make new plastic bottles, containers, bags, and clothing materials. Another application of recycled plastic is in manufacturing plastic Fig. 8. Cyber-physical display of platform for waste-to-resource matching between companies. Table 7 Main products and by-products of each type of food waste to energy technology . Conversion process Products By-products Anaerobic digestion Gas  Sludge that can be used as a fertilizer after being treated Ethanol fermentation Ethanol, CO 2 Animal feed Incineration Heat, electricity Ash Pyrolysis Char, oil or tar, gas  Char that can be used as an oil amendment, activated coal or sorbent Gasiﬁcation Gas  Ash Hydrothermal carbonization Hydrochar and gas  Crude oil and process water P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 10 lumber which can be used to construct pier and dock surfaces, marine piling, fences, park benches, and outdoor decking. Plastic lumber mostly uses HDPE, LDPE, and PP as the feedstock. Another application of recycled plastic is in producing plastic ﬁlament for 3D printing. Several companies have developed machines that are able to shred andgrind post-consumer plastic, speci ﬁcally HDPE, which is then melted, extruded, and then spooled into the plastic ﬁlament. 3D printers then use the ﬁlament to make new plastic products. The variety of applica- tions available for recycled plastic material drives the demand to collectand recycle post-consumer plastic through the di ﬀerent conversion methods. 3.6.4. Electronic waste Waste electrical and electronic equipment, also known as e-waste, has become a pressing environmental problem globally due to the rapid uptake of electrical and electronic equipment by consumers. In 2016, global e-waste generation reached 44.7 million metric tonnes and only 20% was recycled . Asia generated the most e-waste followed by Europe, the Americas, Africa, and Oceana. The biggestchallenge is that a majority of e-waste is not tracked and documented adequately and waste equipment is not recycled or treated properly. E- waste recycling is currently driven by prevention of hazardous heavy metals from damaging ecosystems and human health and capturing precious metals such as copper, steel, aluminum, and gold. Traditional e-waste recycling starts with manual disassembly and separation of the diﬀerent components. Then the components are categorized into parts that can be reused or need to be further processed for recycling. Partsthat are unable to be disassembled are then sent through size reduction processes, removal of dust and debris, and then separation of metallic contents through magnets. Pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes are currently practiced in industry to extract valuable metals from e-waste.Pyrometallurgical processes extract metals by directly burning e-waste in a blast furnace resulting in a product with 70– 80% black copper by weight. The black copper is then put through a converter to be oxidizedand then reduced in an anode furnace. Afterwards, the copper anode produced is further puri ﬁed in a sulfuric acid electrolyte with other elements such as nickel, zinc, and iron. An issue with pyrometallurgicalrecovery is that huge amounts of wastewater and residues are producedwhich can cause serious pollution if the wastes are not handled prop- erly. Furthermore, it is hard to recover metals other than copper through incineration and non-metallic materials cannot be recycled during the process. In hydrometallurgy, strong acids such as HNO 3, HCl, or HClO 4are commonly used as leaching solvents to extract metals such as copper, lead, and zinc from e-waste. Cyanide leaching has also been done to extract gold from e-waste components. The challenge with these traditional methods of incineration and acid leaching is that the processes have low metal recovery rates and the chemicals used and wastes produced are hazardous to human health and the environment. More advanced methods of e-waste recycling exist that can achieve higher metal recovery rates, lower costs and resource inputs, and re- duce impacts to the environment and human health ( Zhang and Xu, 2016 ). The challenges of some advanced methods are that they are still immature and have only shown successful results at the lab or pilot level and have high investment costs. The processes, inputs, and pro- ducts extracted through di ﬀerent methods of e-waste recycling are summarized in Table 8. 3.6.5. Remanufacturing Remanufacturing is another form of waste to resource conversion that focuses on bringing used products back to original or better con-ditions . Products that are easy to disassemble enable e ﬃcient remanufacturing. Steps in the remanufacturing process are illustrated in Fig. 10. Most remanufactured products are required to pass a set of quality standards before they are resent out for sale. Companies around the world that conduct remanufacturing activities are listed in Table 9. Remanufacturing has been an undervalued part of the sustainable industries landscape with activities promoted only on a sector-by-sector basis. The prices of remanufactured products are also typically 60 –80% lower compared to the cost of a new product (Centre for Remanufacturing and Reuse, 2017). The European Remanufacturing Network conducted a Remanufacturing Market Study to estimate the level of remanufacturing in the European Union and understand the barriers that need to be addressed to advance remanufacturing. Countries covered in this landscape review were Brazil, China, Fig. 9. Classiﬁcation of plastic waste recycling methods .P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 11 Denmark, India, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, United Kingdom, and United States . From the study, the major challenges of remanufacturing identi ﬁed were: 1 Logistics chain: Costly and complicated collection of cores.2 Compliance with quality requirements: Costly to ensure the quality of remanufactured products. 3 Long-term investment: Cost intensive research and development is required for remanufacturing and has a long payback period thatcan be too risky for some companies. 4 Too much transparency: Remanufacturing requires cooperation be- tween suppliers and customers, as well as an open value chain. This can give competitors an advantage and increase espionage. 5 Sales versus leasing: To counter customers ’skepticism of re- manufactured products, some companies lease their products to the customers. The inability to lease some product types was seen to be a potential barrier. 6 Complex with seemingly overlapping authorities and contradictory regulations from governments have deterred remanufacturing pro-gress in certain countries. 7 In middle income or developing countries, the remanufacturing sector is largely unregulated, quality varies, and counterfeiting is common. Advancing research and implementation of technologies for re- cycling food, paper, cardboard, plastic, e-waste, and other post-con-sumer products contributes to building a ZWM ecosystem by increasing the amount of waste recovered for use as resources in other supplychains and reduces reliance on virgin materials in manufacturing. Greater waste to resource conversion also reduces stress on the limited landﬁll capacity in di ﬀerent countries and also reduces the amount of waste shipped abroad for disposal. 4. Discussion 4.1. Integrating ZWM technologies The review of state-of-the-art industry technologies and research revealed that there are many technology options that waste value chain stakeholders in Singapore and other countries can adopt to achieve ZWM. Applications of Internet-of-Things  technologies was found in the review to be an enabling factor for connecting di ﬀerent stake- holders along the waste value chain. IoT is the connection of all tech-nologies to the internet and to each other that builds o ﬀcloud com- puting and networks of sensors that continuously collect and monitordata. Devices in IoT are not limited to smartphones, but also include everyday equipment such as co ﬀee makers, washing machines, house- hold lighting, vehicles, and cash registers ( Risteska Stojkoska and Trivodaliev, 2017). IoT has risen due to swift expansion of basic and aﬀordable internet access and growth in smartphone adoption. Smart waste collection systems demonstrated the application of IoT in cities through the use of the internet to connect sensors, smart bins, waste hauling trucks, and the waste management system. IoT technologies are also applicable to collaborative platforms for industrial symbiosis. This is because data covering waste volume, type, and cost from waste producers and recyclers can be shared between stakeholders toTable 8 E-waste metal recovery processes, inputs, and products. E-waste metal recovery methodProcess details and inputs Products extracted Pyrometallurgy Main processes include dismantling, smelting in a plasma arc furnace, drossing, sintering, melting and reactions in a gas phase at high temperatures. Crushedscraps containing base and precious metals are burned in a high temperaturefurnace. Metals are then volatilized by a chemical reaction or by heat, andimpurities are converted into slags.Improved treatment of pollutants from incineration and puri ﬁcation process compared to traditional pyrometallurgy.High quality copper. Other pure solid metals that havebeen extracted include silver, gold, palladium, nickel,selenium, and zinc. Hydrometallurgy Can achieve more targeted metal recovery and pre-treatment, better control of chemical reaction and produces less pollution.Uses more mild leaching agents such as chlorinate, ammonia-ammonium, non-cyanide lixiviants, and organic acids .Metal extraction rates as high as 98% at lab/pilot scale.Copper, gold, silver, palladium extracted in solution Biometallurgy Bioleaching and biosorption are the two main techniques for metal recovery. Bioleaching uses acidophilic group of bacteria to bioleach heavy metals. Biosorption uses biological materials to remove substances from solution in a physico-chemical and metabolism independent process. Microorganisms used as biosorbents include bacteria, fungi, algae, actinomycetes,yeasts and some biowaste materials.Technology currently successful at laboratory scale and has not been industrializedyet.Copper, nickel, zinc, chromium, gold, silver extracted in solution Electrochemical technology Highly energy e ﬃciency process and uses a minimal amount of chemicals to dissolve and recover metals on a cathode for further processing. An electrochemical cell maximizes energy e ﬃciency of the process. The process of electrorecycling generates oxidizing agents at an anode in order to dissolve metals from the scrap matrix. The dissolved metals are then reduced at the cathode.Technology has not been commercialized yet.Pure solid copper, gold, silver Supercritical technology An environmentally friendly method that decomposes organic polymers and recycles metals since supercritical substances have unique properties such as lowviscosities, high mass transport coe ﬃcient, high di ﬀusivity, and high solubility. Example supercritical substances used are supercritical water, supercritical methanol. Technology has not been commercialized yet.Almost all metals can be extracted at a high recovery rate. Output is a solid mixture of metals. Vacuum metallurgical technologyMetals are separated based on di ﬀerence in water pressure of the metal elements at the same temperature. Can separate and recycle di ﬀerent metals from waste printed circuit boards under the guidance of separation criteria.Four crucial processes of vacuum distillation of metals are heat transfer,evaporation, mass transfer and condensation.Main environmental bene ﬁt is wastewater pollution is not produced. Technology is still immature and has not been commercialized yet.Cadmium, zinc, leadP. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 12 facilitate feasible waste to resource matches and exchanges. 4.2. Feasibility of ZWM technologies in Singapore Applying the ZWM framework introduced in this study can help decision-makers explore the technology options that can improve waste reduction in manufacturing and increase reuse, sorting, collection, and recycling along the entire waste value chain. However, there are several limitations existing ZWM technologies may face during implementation in the manufacturing and waste management sectors in dense urbancities such as Singapore. This section brie ﬂy revisits Singapore ’s man- ufacturing and waste management sectors and discusses the practicalfeasibility of implementing the technologies reviewed under the ZWM themes. Based on the barriers identi ﬁed in implementing ZWM tech- nologies, future areas of research are recommended to help Singaporeand other dense urban regions overcome them to transition to a circulareconomy. 4.2.1. Manufacturing and waste management sectors Similar to many other nations and cities across the world, Singapore seeks to transition to a circular economy to meet their national zero waste goals while also advancing its manufacturing sector to boost economic growth. Singapore ’s manufacturing sector is dominated by the key industry clusters of electronics, chemicals, biomedical sciences,logistics, and transport engineering that contribute to 20 –25% of the country ’s GDP . Singapore is globally ranked as the fourth largest exporter of high-tech goods and many leading multinational companies across di ﬀerent industrial sectors have chosen Singapore as a strategic manufacturing hub ( Economic Development Board of Singapore, 2018 ). In terms of sustainability, the Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology operates a Sustain-able Manufacturing Centre that assists companies in Singapore improve energy, water, and material e ﬃciency and waste reduction across their entire manufacturing supply chain using both hardware and softwaresolutions. Singapore currently operates a well-organized waste collection and disposal system to manage waste generated across all economic activ- ities, but it still requires improvements to boost its overall recycling rate. Wastes are collected by four public waste collector companies which are Colex Environmental Pte. Ltd, SembWaste Pte. Ltd, Veolia ES Singapore Pte Ltd, and 800 Super Waste Management Pte. Ltd. Waste collection in Singapore is divided into six regions of which the four companies are responsible for managing separately. The waste collected are sent to sorting facilities where recyclables are separated, and the rest is sent to Singapore ’s four waste-to-energy incineration plants. The incineration ash and waste deemed unrecyclable are sent to SemakauLandﬁll forﬁnal disposal. Singapore ’s main goal in becoming a zero waste nation is to increase its recycling rate to 70% by 2030 from its current rate of 60%. Today, about 37% of waste generated in Singapore is incinerated and 3% of waste generated is sent to the land ﬁll. As shown in Fig. 11, paper and cardboard, plastic, and food were the waste streams with the highest volumes, but lowest recycling rates. As a result, paper and cardboard, plastic, and food waste as well as electronic wastes have become the target waste streams to be addressed in Singapore ’s Zero Waste Masterplan that is undergoing public con- sultation . One large scale project the Government of Singapore has invested in to improve waste management is develop- ment of an integrated waste management facility  that is ex- pected to start operating in 2022. The key waste streams to be handled at the IWMF are incinerable wastes at 5800 tonnes/day, household recyclables at 250 tonnes/day, food waste at 400 tonnes/day, and de- watered sludge at 800 tonnes/day ( National Environment Agency of Singapore, 2018b ). To address e-wastes, the Government of Singapore will implement extended producer responsibility system to cover ﬁve categories which are information and communications technology, such as mobile phones and computers; solar panels; batteries; lamps and large household appliances such as refrigerators, air-conditioners, washing machines and dryers . 4.2.2. Implementation barriers of ZWM technologies Opportunities exist to reduce waste generation and recover value from the high volumes of waste sent to the incinerator, but several barriers need to be overcome with regards to the feasibility of tech- nologies reviewed under the ZWM themes. Speci ﬁc technologies under the ZWM themes face fewer implementation barriers compared toothers in Singapore to help transition to a circular economy. In thetheme of design for zero waste, the feasibility of design for disassembly to impact existing products consumed in Singapore varies depending on the speci ﬁc technology. In the case of building construction, modular construction of buildings has already demonstrated high feasibility. Inthe case of Singapore, the Housing Development Board  has al- ready committed to having 35% of all new public housing projects be Fig. 10. Remanufacturing process diagram (Centre for Remanufacturing and Reuse, 2017). Table 9 Companies engaged in remanufacturing organized by product sector. Product sector Company Machine tools Jones & Shipman, Millbrook, Douglas- Curtis, Marrill Pumps Weir, Plenty, Sulzer, Johnson Compressors Comptec, Flatwoods, J&E Hall, ThermoCom Refrigeration installations Bond Group, Manor Concepts Starter motors Sovereign Automatic transmissions Mitchell-Cotts, ATP Car and truck engines Autocraft, Ivor Searle, Perkins, Caterpillar Photocopiers and printer consumables Xerox, Danwood, Greenstrike Excavation equipment Powerhire, Blackhill Engineering Power turbines Alstom Defense equipment Vickers, BAe Systems, ABRO Computer and telecoms equipment Sony, SolectronP. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 13 constructed by using modular units produced at the factory instead of onsite construction . The bene ﬁts the HDB will gain from using prefabricated pre ﬁnished volumetric construction technology is improvement in productivity by 50%  and reduced waste generation from construction, reduced noise and dust at the construc-tion site, and fewer incidences of wet construction joints all while having a higher quality home. Using modular construction is expected to increase costs by about 8%, but the higher construction costs will be oﬀset by manpower savings . Implementation of additive manufacturing technology in Singapore is being actively researched and developed ( National Research Foundation, 2018) which will reduce generation of waste plastics,construction materials, and metals as well as improve energy e ﬃciency in manufacturing processes in Singapore. Individual products designedfor disassembly are feasible to produce in Singapore due to the country ’ capabilities in high-performance manufacturing technology. However,even if products designed for disassembly are produced in Singapore, the waste reduction bene ﬁts within the country would be dependent on whether a majority of those products are used in Singapore or exportedabroad. As shown in Table 10, an analysis of Singapore ’s 2012 input output tables, the latest dataset publicly available, reveals that 75% ofthe goods and services households in Singapore consumed from the manufacturing sector were imported from abroad ( Singapore Department of Statistics, 2012). At the product group level, over 90% of the food products consumed in Singapore are imported from overseas . Therefore, although Singapore is highly capable of manufacturing products designed for disassembly, the waste reduction bene ﬁts would be limited in the case where an overwhelming majority of households in Singapore consume products imported fromabroad that are not designed for disassembly instead of equivalent products designed for disassembly and manufactured in Singapore. Smart waste audit and reduction technologies are feasible to im- plement on the software side for waste data management and bench- marking. However, the physical process of waste data collection is the technical barrier that needs to be overcome. Unlike countries such as Japan, the U.S., and the UK that typically sort their wastes on site through specialized bins, a majority of post-consumer waste generated in Singapore ’s residential and commercial premises is commingled and therefore highly heterogenous in composition. State-of-the-art smartwaste bins are able to measure the overall volume of waste generated, but they lack the ability to measure the volumes of waste by material type, which is information that is more valuable for detailed waste reduction planning. Countries and other dense urban centers such as Singapore require hardware technologies that are able to e ﬃciently measure the volume of waste generated and estimate its materialcomposition. Smart waste collection technologies have been highly feasible to implement in Singapore ’s waste collection system. One of Singapore ’s four public waste collectors 800 Super has already implemented smartwaste collection sensors at its compacters in bin centers in the towns of Tampines and Pasar Ris . The NEA has stated Fig. 11. Volume of waste disposed and recycled in Singapore in 2018. Table 10 Private consumption of goods and services in Singapore, 2012. Sector Domestic Imports Domestic and Imports Domestic share Import share Manufacturing 5.4 16.6 22 25% 75% Utilities 2.7 0 2.7 100% 0% Construction 0 0 0 0% 0% Other goods 0 1.5 1.5 0% 100% Wholesale and retail trade 12.7 0 12.7 100% 0% transportation and storage 6.7 1.3 8 84% 16% Accommodation and food services 12.4 0 12.4 100% 0% Information and communications 2.9 0.1 3 97% 3% Finance and insurance 8.3 0 8.3 100% 0% Business services 22.3 0 22.3 100% 0% Other services 24.8 −0.2 24.6 101% −1% Total 98.2 19.3 117.5 84% 16% Values in billion U.S. dollars.P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 14 that the new smart waste collection systems have improved e ﬃciency and will not result in increases in domestic waste collection fees. Fur- thermore, NEA will progressively roll out smart waste collection system through public waste collection companies by the end of 2021. Smart waste bins have not faced technical barriers in implementation. Many commercial premises in Singapore have already set up smart waste bins . The feasibility of implementing technologies for high-value mixed waste processing has not been an issue in Singapore since the country currently has several material recovery facilities operating which have helped the country maintain its recycling rate at 60%. However, the remaining 40% of mixed waste that is not recycled is of very low quality and as a result it is sent to the incinerators. Increasing the quality of the remaining 40% of mixed waste is necessary to increase the overall re- cycling rate. As shown in Fig. 12 , Singapore provides blue bins for re- sidents to mix together all recyclables. Similar to other countries around the world, many non-recyclable materials are often mixed in with the recyclables in Singapore whichcauses contamination. According to the NEA, 40% of waste disposed in bins is contaminated and is not recoverable for recycling ( Channel NewsAsia, 2019b ). In residential settings, waste chutes are provided where residents are able to conveniently mix all wastes in a bag and throw it away . Although this practice enables an eﬃcient waste collection system, it increases contamination of mate- rials that are then no longer recoverable for recycling. Research is therefore needed to determine methods or technologies that wouldprevent contamination of recyclable waste streams. Smaller scalesorting facilities that are suitable for dense urban and residential areas that consumers can conveniently access would be able to reduce the amount of recyclable materials that get sent to the incinerator due to contamination. Collaborative platforms for industrial symbiosis face few technical barriers for implementation in Singapore. This technology relies pri- marily on digital systems and would require minimal to nearly no changes in physical infrastructure to implement . Many sharing economy-based services are already actively used inSingapore and so a similar digital platform focused on waste to resource matching and exchanges between individuals and companies is tech- nically feasible. One of the challenges that may arise during the initial stages of implementation would be achieving a critical mass of users for the collaborative platform to successfully facilitate industrial symbiosis exchanges. The impact on Singapore ’s waste management system through implementing collaborative platforms for industrial symbiosiswould be a reduction in the amount of waste materials that get mixed in with waste sent to incinerators. Instead, users would be directly mat- ched to a market where their waste could be recycled to gain value and not need to rely on the existing waste collection and recycling system. Singapore ’s severe lack of land space for development presents a major limitation in feasibility of implementing the technologies re- viewed under the theme of waste to resource conversion and recycling . With a total land area of 720 square kilometers, Singapore has the third highest population density inthe world at 7,916 people per square kilometer ( World Bank Group, 2017 ). Competition for land is therefore tough and o ﬀers little oppor- tunity to implement new large-scale mixed-waste processing and seg- regation facilities, recycling centers, and waste digestors. As Singa- pore ’s population is 100% urbanized, implementation of these large- scale technologies in urban space-constrained environments could en-counter public backlash due to the disruptive e ﬀects of waste conver- sion technologies such as foul odors and loud noises. In the case of food waste, Singapore has a high potential for improvement as only 16% of it is recycled and the volume of food waste generated continues to grow annually as shown in Fig. 13 . The new IWMF that will begin operating in 2022 is expected to treat 400 tonnes of food waste per day alone which would only increase the recycling rate to at most 34%, which still leaves more room for im- provement. However, large scale food waste recycling facilities de- signed to treat as high as 800 tonnes of food waste per day have provento be unsuccessful in Singapore due to contamination and poor logistics in food waste collection . Food waste is typically generated in many distributed locations. Therefore, implementation of additional food waste digesters to successfully increase the amount of Fig. 12. Single-stream recycling collection bin in Singapore. Fig. 13. Food waste generation in Singapore between 2003 –2018.P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 15 food waste recycled will require conventional large scale technologies to be scaled down to match the volumes generated at the di ﬀerent sites and also be located closer to the source to avoid logistical issues ( Lou et al., 2012 ). Systems will need to be designed in a way that have a very low level of disturbance to people in residential and commercial areas. Paper recycling currently stands at 50% and o ﬀers more potential for increasing waste recovery. In Singapore, waste paper that is re-cyclable is sorted, baled, and shipped overseas for recycling since there are no paper mills in Singapore. Restrictions in land use does not make it feasible for implementing new paper recycling facilities in Singapore. However, the amount of waste paper disposed can be reduced by in- creasing the amount of waste paper collected, sorted, and baled. Existing technologies for collecting and sorting paper include conveyor belts, balers, trucks, which are all very large in size. The space occupied by such equipment and storage space are limitations to increasing the rate of waste paper recovery in highly dense urban regions such as Singapore. Plastic recycling currently stands at 4% which presents a high op- portunity for improvement. Currently, a majority of the plastic that Singapore recycles is done outside of the country. In 2016, Singapore exported nearly 42,000 tonnes of plastic waste to China, Malaysia, Vietnam and Indonesia  representing about 81% of the plastic waste Singapore recycled and 5% of the total plastic wastegenerated. Singapore has therefore relied on its larger neighboring countries with large scale facilities to deal the process of shredding and washing waste plastics for recycling or through chemical recycling. The processes of collection and sorting of waste plastics however is taken care of by public waste collectors and other companies in Singapore. Even if Singapore were able to implement large scale plastic facilities to create products from recycled plastic waste, other than electricity and fuel, the issue of plastic waste contamination would still need to be resolved. More than 50% of waste plastics collected by recycling fa- cilities in Singapore are incinerated because they are highly con-taminated . Therefore, the issue of preventing con- tamination of waste plastics should be addressed if mechanicalrecycling methods are to be used to boost the plastic recycling rate in Singapore far beyond 4%. Tertiary plastic recycling to high value fuels through thermochemical conversion methods could also serve as al- ternative to mechanical plastic recycling to deal with the high mixture and impurities in Singapore ’s plastic waste streams . For e-waste streams, using pyrometallurgical methods to recycle the 60,000 tonnes of e-waste produced in Singapore annually will face implementation barriers due to high costs, high energy intensity, and toxic fumes that pollute the environment. Voluntary programs led by industry currently exist where companies accept di ﬀerent types of e- wastes and send them o ﬀto partner companies for recycling ( NEA, 2019a ). A total of 15 companies in Singapore are listed as o ﬃcial partners for e-waste recycling  of which two of these companies publicly state that they use hydrometallurgical methods to recover valuable materials in e-waste. These companies carry out their operations in facilities sited on industrial premises. Hydrometallurgical methods have attracted more attention in research and development in Singapore. Nanyang Technological University, the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission, and NEA have invested USD14.8 million to develop a research center focused on less toxic e- waste recycling using hydrometallurgical methods along with other non-pyrometallurgical techniques . Re- manufacturing would also be a feasible method Singapore can use toreduce the amount of electronics and electrical equipment that have to be recycled. Research and development and implementation of re- manufacturing in industry is already active in Singapore at research institutes such as the Advanced Remanufacturing and Technology Centre  that collaborates with 65 members ranging from global multinational corporations to small and medium enterprises ( ARTC, 2019 ).5. Future research areas in ZWM To overcome the limitations that current ZWM technologies may face during implementation in Singapore and other dense urban set-tings around the world, several areas of research are recommended. 1Smart bins that measure waste material composition: To ad- vance smart waste audit and reduction planning, smart waste binsneed to be able to collect data about the material composition of the waste disposed in the bin. This type of data is valuable for organi-zations to monitor the type of waste they produce and then make strategic waste reduction plans that target speci ﬁc waste streams. Identifying the waste composition in a smart waste bin would beespecially useful for countries and cities that typically use single bins for disposing both wastes and recyclable items. 2Small and medium sized waste sorting technologies: Although the global mixed waste processing industry is moving towards large regional single-stream facilities, small and medium sized sorting facilities are still needed in urban centers that have higher waste generation levels. Research is needed to design waste sorting and material recovery facilities and equipment that have lower space requirements so that they can be sited within or closer to urban centers. Having smaller waste sorting facilities distributed in urban centers could reduce the logistical demands as the facilities would be closer to the sources of waste generation. 3Matching consumers with remanufacturing services:Households that use products produced domestically or imported from abroad may not know that their product can be repaired or refurbished to extend its useful life and may not know where to access such services. Certain company-speci ﬁc products imported from abroad that can be remanufactured may not have their com-pany’ s service available in the country the product is used in. However, there may be small-medium enterprises that have the technical capability to remanufacture di ﬀerent products regardless of the company the product is manufactured from. Industrial sym-biosis platforms should not only focus on waste to resource ex- changes, but also help match consumers with remanufacturing ser- vice providers. These types of matches would help facilitate remanufacturing of products that are designed to be repaired or disassembled regardless of whether the product was imported or produced domestically. 4Life cycle impact evaluation models for IS platforms: Multilevel models that evaluate the life cycle impacts of all waste to resource exchanges in closing the resource loop are needed in industrial symbiosis platforms to prevent environmental burden shifting. These models can help businesses and other stakeholders of a col- laborative platform understand and design better systems to gain both environmental and economic costs and bene ﬁts from closing resource loops . Government entities and city planners can also use these models to measure performance in meeting environmental sustainability tar- gets. 5Small scale food waste digesters: Dense urban settings present space limitations for implementing large scale digesters for recycling a region’ s food waste. Implementation experience has shown that large scale digesters in urban settings face ﬁnancial issues due to logistical challenges. Research is therefore needed in developing smaller food waste digestion systems that can be sited close to the source of generation such as residential areas or commercial dining areas and sized for the speci ﬁc daily food waste volumes. The technical issues that need to be overcome are reducing odor andnoise from the small scale digesters to avoid disturbance to people nearby. 6Reducing contamination of consumer waste streams:Technologies for recycling waste such as plastics and paper and cardboard are already mature, but recycling rates are still low. OneP. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 16 major cause of this is that many recyclable materials become highly contaminated when mixed with other waste streams. The con- taminated recyclable materials are sent to the land ﬁll or incinerator because they are no longer economic to recycle. Research is neededin developing technologies that are able to recycle materials that are contaminated or technologies that can reduce the contamination of disposed materials to overcome this issue which would help boost the volume of materials that are recycled. 6. Conclusion As more nations continue to implement waste import bans, gov- ernments and businesses that were highly reliant on exporting theirwastes abroad are now faced with the challenge of ﬁnding alternative solutions to manage their growing volumes of wastes. Moving beyondtraditional end-of-pipe waste disposal methods and transitioning to a circular economy is critical to overcoming the global waste challenge in a holistic manner. ZWM can aid in the transition by developing man- ufacturing systems that minimize waste generation across entire value chains and maximizing the use of wastes as resources in other supply chains. To enable ZWM, stakeholders such as generators, collectors, and converters and recyclers will need to know what technologies they can implement to ful ﬁll their role in the waste value chain. This study proposes a framework for ZWM comprising six themes of  design forzero waste;  smart waste audit and reduction planning;  smart waste collection;  high-value mixed waste processing;  colla- borative platform for industrial symbiosis;  waste to resource con- version and recycling. The framework aims to help stakeholders in the waste value chain identify the technologies they can implement to achieve ZWM. Through a systematic review approach, state-of-the-art technologies and research literature under the six themes of the ZWM frameworkwere identi ﬁed and examined. The ﬁndings of the review revealed that there are many mature technologies under each theme of ZWM thatstakeholders can implement to address their challenges. The technolo- gies include additive manufacturing, design for disassembly, modular products and buildings, smart waste auditing tools, smart waste bins and smart waste collection systems, material recovery and mixed waste processing technologies and facilities, digital platforms for enabling industrial symbiosis, remanufacturing, and technologies for recycling waste streams of food, paper and cardboard, plastics, and electronics and electrical equipment. The use of IoT technologies in smart waste collection systems showed that IoT technologies should be applied to ZWM overall so that waste generators, collectors, and converters can be integrated on a single system that shares data to facilitate greater waste to resource exchanges. The feasibility and technical limitations of im- plementing the ZWM technologies in highly dense urban centers were then discussed by using the case of Singapore. To overcome the tech- nical limitations of ZWM technologies and make them more feasible to implement in urban centers, it is recommended that future research is pursued in scaling down waste sorting facilities and food waste diges- ters, developing smart waste bins that collect data about waste material composition, and improving collaborative platforms for industrial symbiosis so that they can measure the life cycle impacts of waste to resource exchanges and match consumers with product re- manufacturing services. The ﬁndings of this study can be used by countries and cities to develop a roadmap for ZWM. In Singapore andother similar countries and urban settings, implementing the technol- ogies and conducting activities that contribute to the themes of ZWM through a roadmap will help transform the manufacturing sector by decoupling economic growth from environmental degradation and bolster resource security. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in theonline version, at doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019. 104438 . References ABB, 2018. Improving Process E ﬃciency and Product Quality for Pulp & Paper Industry. . http://new.abb.com/cn/en/smart-technology/smart- manufacturing-and-production/pulp-paper-industry . . Advanced Remanufacturing Technology Centre, 2019. Advanced Remanufacturing Technology Centre Homepage . https://www.a-star.edu.sg/artc . Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority of Singapore, 2019. The Food We Eat. [WWW Document]. https://www.ava.gov.sg/explore-by-sections/food/singapore-food- supply/the-food-we-eat . . Álvarez, R., Ruiz-Puente, C., 2017. Development of the tool SymbioSyS to support the transition towards a circular economy based on industrial symbiosis strategies. Waste Biomass Valori. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12649-016-9748-1 . Baldé, C.P., Forti, V., Gray, V., Kuehr, R., Stegmann, P., 2017. The Global E-Waste Monitor 2017. . http://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:6341/ Global-E-waste_Monitor_2017__electronic_single_pages_.pdf . United Nations University. Berge, N.D., Ro, K.S., Mao, J., Flora, J.R.V., Chappell, M.A., Bae, S., 2011. Hydrothermal carbonization of municipal waste streams. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45, 5696 –5703. https://doi.org/10.1021/es2004528 . Bigbelly, 2017. Smart City Solutions. . http://bigbelly.com/ solutions/city/ . . BigBelly Solar, 2018. JTC Puts up More ‘smart ’Waste Bins That Alert Cleaners via SMS When Full. . http://bigbelly.com.sg/jtc-puts-up-more-smart- waste-bins-that-alert-cleaners-via-sms-when-full/ . . Bin-e, 2017. Bin-e . URL http://www.bine.world/ . Boston Consulting Group, 2017. BCG Launches Industry 4.0 Accelerator Program and Its First Asian Innovation Centre for Operations  in Singapore. .https://www.bcg.com/en-sea/d/press/3april2017-asian-innovation-centre-for- operations-150605 . . BRE, 2017. SMARTWaste Brochure. . http://www.smartwaste.co.uk/ ﬁlelibrary/downloads/SmartWaste-Brochure.-June-2017.pdf . . Center for Remanufacturing and Reuse, 2017. What Is Remanufacturing? [WWW Document]. http://www.remanufacturing.org.uk/what-is-remanufacturing.php . . Channel NewsAsia, 2019a. New S$20 Million Lab to Develop Less Toxic E-Waste Recycling Methods. . https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/ singapore/ntu-cea-launch-20m-joint-lab-e-waste-recycling-11339564 (Accessed 3.14.19). . Channel NewsAsia, 2019b. Zero Waste Masterplan to Focus on Electronics, Packaging, Food Waste: Masagos. . https://www.channelnewsasia.com/ news/singapore/singapore-year-towards-zero-waste-masterplan-masagos-11198238 . . Channel NewsAsia, 2018. Smart Waste System in Tampines, Pasir Ris Alerts Collection Crew When Nearly Full. . https://www.channelnewsasia.com/ news/singapore/smart-waste-system-tampines-pasir-ris-alerts-collection-crew- 10719228 . . Channel NewsAsia, 2017. HDB To Expand Use of Prefabrication Building Methods in BTO Projects. . https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/ hdb-to-expand-use-of-prefabrication-building-methods-in-bto-9189786 (Accessed 3.14.19). . Cheng, G., Huang, G., Dong, C., Xu, Y., Chen, J., 2017a. Distributed Mixed-integer Fuzzy Hierarchical Programming for Municipal Solid Waste Management. Part II: Scheme Analysis and Mechanism Revelation. pp. 8711 –8721. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11356-017-8574-8 . Cheng, G., Huang, G., Dong, C., Xu, Y., Chen, X., Chen, J., 2017b. Distributed mixed- integer fuzzy hierarchical programming for municipal solid waste management. PartI: system identi ﬁcation and methodology development. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 24, 7236 –7252. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-8284-7 . Chertow, M., Park, J., 2015. Scholarship and practice in industrial symbiosis: 1989 –2014. Taking Stock of Industrial Ecology. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20571-7_5 . CleanRobotics, 2016. Intoducing Trashbot. . http://www. cleanrobotics.com/2016/11/15/IntroducingTrashbot/ . . CNN, 2017. Addidas Unveils New 3D Printed Shoes. . http://money. cnn.com/2017/04/07/technology/adidas-3d-printed-shoe/index.html (Accessed 10.20.17). . Denyer, D., Tran ﬁeld, D., 2009. Producing a systematic review. The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Research Methods. pp. 671 –689. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 03634528709378635 . Eco-Business, 2011. Food Waste Recycler Folds. . https://www.eco- business.com/news/food-waste-recycler-folds/ . . Economic Development Board of Singapore, 2018. Advanced Manufacturing. [WWW Document]. https://www.edb.gov.sg/en/our-industries/industries-and-key- activities/advanced-manufacturing.html . . Ecube Labs, 2017a. CleanCAP, The Ultrasonic Fill-Level Sensor. . http://ecubelabs.com/integrated-waste-management/ultrasonic- ﬁll-level-sensor/ . . Ecube Labs, 2017b. Case Studies. . http://ecubelabs.com/case- studies/ . . Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013. Engineering the Circular Economy: A Field ManualP. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 17 for Re-Designing a Regenerative Economy . Enterprise Singapore, 2019. SME Portal Singapore. . https://www. smeportal.sg/content/smeportal/en/industries/manufacturing.html (Accessed 3.14.19). . Ernst and Young, 2015. Modular product design: reducing complexity, increasing e ﬃ- cacy. Performance 7 , 56 –63. European Commission, 2015. Remanufacturing Market Study. European Commission. Available from: http://www.remanufacturing.eu/assets/pdfs/remanufacturing- market-study.pdf . Fraccascia, L., Murat Yazan, D., 2018. The Role of Online Information-Sharing Platforms on the Performance of Industrial Symbiosis Networks. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resconrec.2018.03.009 . Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton Inc, 2015. The Evolution of Mixed Waste Processing Facilities 1970 - Today. Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton Inc.. Available from: https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Education-Resources/Publications/The- Evolution-of-Mixed-Waste-Processing-Facilities.pdf . Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton Inc, 2016. Supplemental Report: The Evolution of Mixed Waste Processing Facilities —Technology and Equipment Guide. Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton Inc.. Available from: https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Education- Resources/Publications/The-Evolution-of-Mixed-Waste-Processing-Facilities-Technology-and-Equipment-Guide.pdf . Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton, Inc, 2017. Implementation of SmartEngine ™Online Waste Audit and Business Recycling Promotion Tool (Solid Waste Authority of Central Ohio). . http://gbbinc.com/services/commercial-and- industrial-recycling/implementation-of-smartengine-online-waste-audit-and- business-recycling-promotion-tool . Gershman, Brickner, and Bratton, Inc. Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., Ulgiati, S., 2016. A review on circular economy: the expected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and economic systems. J. Clean.Prod. 114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007 . GreenBiz, 2017. IoT And Smart City Trends Boost Smart Waste Collection Market. . https://www.greenbiz.com/article/iot-and-smart-city-trends- boost-smart-waste-collection-market . . Gutierrez, J.M., Jensen, M., Henius, M., Riaz, T., 2015. Smart waste collection system based on location intelligence. Procedia Comput. Sci. 61, 120 –127. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.170 . Housing Development Board, 2017. New Initiatives to Boost Construction Productivity in HDB Projects. . https://www.hdb.gov.sg/cs/infoweb/press- release/new-initiatives-to-boost-construction-productivity . . International Synergies, 2019. SYNERGie 4.0. . https://www. international-synergies.com/what-we-do/synergie40/ . . Jose, R., Ramakrishna, S., 2018. Materials 4.0: materials big data enabled materials discovery. Appl. Mater. Today 10, 127 –132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2017. 12.015 . Kamali, M., Hewage, K., 2017. Development of performance criteria for sustainability evaluation of modular versus conventional construction methods. J. Clean. Prod. 142,3592 –3606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.108 . Kamali, M., Hewage, K., 2016. Life cycle performance of modular buildings: a critical review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 62, 1171 –1183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser. 2016.05.031 . Kamali, M., Hewage, K., Milani, A.S., 2018. Life cycle sustainability performance as- sessment framework for residential modular buildings: Aggregated sustainability indices. Build. Environ. 138, 21 –41.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.04. 019. Kellens, K., Baumers, M., Gutowski, T.G., Flanagan, W., Lifset, R., Du ﬂou, J.R., 2017. Environmental dimensions of additive manufacturing: mapping application domains and their environmental implications. J. Ind. Ecol. 21 , S49– S68. https://doi.org/ 10.1111/jiec.12629 . Khoo, H.H., 2019. LCA of plastic waste recovery into recycled materials, energy and fuels in Singapore. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 145, 67 –77.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resconrec.2019.02.010 . Kreiger, M.A., Mulder, M.L., Glover, A.G., Pearce, J.M., 2014. Life cycle analysis of dis- tributed recycling of post-consumer high density polyethylene for 3-D printing ﬁla- ment. J. Clean. Prod. 70, 90 –96.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.02.009 . Lee, J., Bagheri, B., Kao, H.A., 2015. A Cyber-Physical Systems architecture for Industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems. Manuf. Lett. 3, 18 –23.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. mfglet.2014.12.001 . Lou, X.F., Nair, J., Ho, G., 2012. Field performance of small scale anaerobic digesters treating food waste. Energy Sustain. Dev. 16, 509 –514. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. esd.2012.06.004 . Low, J.S.C., Lu, W.F., Song, B., 2014. Product Structure-Based Integrated Life Cycle Analysis : a technique for cost modelling and analysis of closed-loop pro- duction systems. J. Clean. Prod. 70, 105 –117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro. 2014.02.037 . Low, J.S.C., Lu, W.F., Lee, H.M., Bin, S., 2012. Methodology for modelling the eco-e ﬃ- ciency of closed-loop product life cycles. Electron. Goes Green 2012, 1 –6 2012+  . Low, J.S.C., Tjandra, T.B., Lu, W.F., Mien, H., 2016. Adaptation of the Product Structure- based Integrated Life cycle Analysis  technique for carbon footprint modellingand analysis of closed-loop production systems. J. Clean. Prod. 120, 105 –123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.095 . Low, J.S.C., Tjandra, T.B., Yunus, F., Si Ying, C., Tan, D.Z.L., Raabe, B., Ng, Y.T., Yeo, Z., Bressan, S., Ramakrishna, S., Herrmann, C., 2018. A collaboration platform for en-abling industrial symbiosis: application of the database engine for waste-to-Resourcematching. Procedia CIRP 69, 849 –854. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.11. 075.Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2013. Additive Manufacturing, GE, the World ’s Largest Manufacturer, is on the Verge of Using 3-D Printing to Make Get Parts.. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/513716/additive- manufacturing/ . . Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources, Government of Singapore, 2015. Sustainable Singapore Blueprint. Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources,Government of Singapore. Available from: https://www.mewr.gov.sg/docs/default- source/module/ssb-publications/41f1d882-73f6-4a4a-964b-6c67091a0fe2.pdf . Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources, G. of S, 2019a. Public Consultation, Zero Waste Master Plan. . https://www.towardszerowaste.sg/ consultation/ . . Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources, G. of S, 2019b. Rubbish Chutes: Curse of Convenience . https://www.mewr.gov.sg/ssb/our-targets/ resource-sustainability/domestic-recycling-rate . Ministry of Trade and Industry of Singapore, 2017. Speech by Minister Iswaran at the Future of Manufacturing  Summit @ Singapore 2017. .https://www.mti.gov.sg/NewsRoom/Pages/Speech-by-Minister-Iswaran-at-the- Future-of-Manufacturing--Summit-@-Singapore-2017.aspx (Accessed 5.22.18). . Misman, M., Raﬁdah, S., Alwi, W., Manan, Z.A., 2008. State-of-the-art for paper recycling. International Conference on Science and Technology . pp. 11 –15. Murakami, J., 2018. The Government Land Sales programme and developers’ willingness to pay for accessibility in Singapore, 1990 –2015. Land Use Policy 75, 292 –302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.03.050 . National Environment Agency of Singapore, 2018a. NEA to Implement E-Waste Management System For Singapore By 2021. . https://www.nea. gov.sg/media/news/news/index/nea-to-implement-e-waste-management-system-for-singapore-by-2021 . . National Environment Agency of Singapore, 2018b. Integrated Waste Management Facility. National Environment Agency of Singapore. Available from: https://www. nea.gov.sg/our-services/waste-management/waste-management-infrastructure/ integrated-waste-management-facility . National Environment Agency of Singapore, 2019a. National Voluntary Partnership for E- Waste Recycling. . https://www.nea.gov.sg/programmes-grants/ schemes/national-voluntary-partnership-for-e-waste-recycling . . National Environment Agency of Singapore, 2019b. Waste Statistics and Overall Recycling. . http://www.nea.gov.sg/energy-waste/waste- management/waste-statistics-and-overall-recycling . National Environment Agency. National Geographic, 2017. A Whopping 91% of Plastic Isn ’t Recycled. [WWW Document]. https://news.nationalgeographic.com/2017/07/plastic-produced- recycling-waste-ocean-trash-debris-environment/ . . National Research Foundation of Singapore, 2018. RIE 2020 Plan, Advanced Manufacturing and Engineering. . https://www.nrf.gov.sg/ rie2020/advanced-manufacturing-and-engineering . . National Research Foundation of Singapore, 2016. Research Innovation Enterprise 2020 Plan: Winning the Future Through Science and Technology. National ResearchFoundation of Singapore. Available from: https://www.nrf.gov.sg/rie2020/ advanced-manufacturing-and-engineering . Navigant Research, 2016. Smart Waste Collection. Navigant Research. Available from: https://www.navigantresearch.com/reports/smart-waste-collection . Ng, Y.T., Tan, Y.S., Jonathan, J.S.C., 2017. Internet of things for real-time waste mon- itoring and benchmarking: waste reduction in manufacturing shop ﬂoor. Procedia CIRP 61, 382 –386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.11.243 . Niaki, M.K., Torabi, S.A., Nonino, F., 2019. Why manufacturers adopt additive manu- facturing technologies: the role of sustainability. J. Clean. Prod. 222, 381 –392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.03.019 . Omar, M.F., Termizi, A.A.A., Zainal, D., Wahap, N.A., Ismail, N.M., Ahmad, N., 2016. Implementation of spatial smart waste management system in Malaysia. IOP Conf.Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 1 –9.https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/37/1/012059 . Pathway 21, 2019. The Materials Marketplace. . https://pathway21. com/ . . Pham, T.P.T., Kaushik, R., Parshetti, G.K., Mahmood, R., Balasubramanian, R., 2015. Food waste-to-energy conversion technologies: current status and future directions.Waste Manage. 38, 399 –408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2014.12.004 . Raabe, B., Low, J.S.C., Juraschek, M., Herrmann, C., Tjandra, T.B., Ng, Y.T., Kurle, D., Cerdas, F., Lueckenga, J., Yeo, Z., Tan, Y.S., 2017. Collaboration platform for en-abling industrial symbiosis: application of the by-product exchange network model. Procedia CIRP 61, 263 –268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.11.225. Elsevier B.V. Ramakrishna, S., Zhang, T.Y., Lu, W.C., Qian, Q., Low, J.S.C., Yune, J.H.R., Tan, D.Z.L., Bressan, S., Sanvito, S., Kalidindi, S.R., 2018. Materials informatics. J. Intell. Manuf. 1–20.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-018-1392-0 . Rios, F.C., Chong, W.K., Grau, D., 2015. Design for disassembly and deconstruction - challenges and opportunities. Procedia Eng. 118, 1296 –1304. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.proeng.2015.08.485 . Risteska Stojkoska, B.L., Trivodaliev, K.V., 2017. A review of Internet of Things for smart home: challenges and solutions. J. Clean. Prod. 140, 1454 –1464. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.006 . Sabaghi, M., Mascle, C., Baptiste, P., 2016. Evaluation of Products at Design Phase for an Eﬃcient Disassembly at End-of-Life. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.01.007 . Shukla, S., Shukla, N., 2017. Smart waste collection system based on IoT (Internet of things): a survey. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 162, 975 –8887 . Singapore Department of Statistics, 2012. Singapore Supply, Use and Input-Output Tables 2012. . https://www.singstat.gov.sg/ ﬁnd-data/search-by-theme/ economy/national-accounts/publications-and-methodology . .P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 18 Singh, N., Hui, D., Singh, R., Ahuja, I.P.S., Feo, L., Fraternali, F., 2016. Recycling of plastic solid waste: a state of art review and future applications. Compos. Part B Eng. 115, 409–422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2016.09.013 . Singh, S., Ramakrishna, S., Gupta, M.K., 2017. Towards zero waste manufacturing: a multidisciplinary review. J. Clean. Prod. 168, 1230 –1243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jclepro.2017.09.108 . Soh, S.L., Ong, S.K., Nee, A.Y.C., 2014. Design for disassembly for remanufacturing: methodology and technology. Procedia CIRP 15, 407 –412. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.procir.2014.06.053 . Song, B., Yeo, Z., Low, J.S.C., Jiewei, D.K., Kurle, D., Cerdas, F., Herrmann, C., 2015. A big data analytics approach to develop industrial symbioses in large cities. ProcediaCIRP 29, 450 –455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2015.01.066 . Srikantha, N., 2017. Waste management in IoT- enabled smart cities: a survey. Int. J. Eng. Comput. Sci. 6, 21507 –21512. https://doi.org/10.18535/ijecs/v6i5.53 . Stock, T., Seliger, G., 2016. Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in industry 4.0. Procedia CIRP 40, 536 –541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.01.129 . Today, 2018. How Singapore ’s Plastic Waste Is Recycled. . https:// www.todayonline.com/singapore/how-singapores-plastic-recycled-3 (Accessed 3.14.19). . Tseng, M.L., Tan, R.R., Chiu, A.S.F., Chien, C.F., Kuo, T.C., 2018. Circular economy meets industry 4.0: can big data drive industrial symbiosis? Resour. Conserv. Recycl.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.12.028 . United Nations, 2018. Word Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision. [WWW Document]. https://population.un.org/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2018-KeyFacts. pdf. United Nations, 2016. United Nations Comtrade Database - International Trade Statistics. . https://comtrade.un.org/data/ . . Wang, P., Liu, Y., Ong, S.K., Nee, A.Y.C., 2014. Modular design of machine tools to fa- cilitate design for disassembly and remanufacturing. Procedia CIRP 15, 443 –448.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2014.06.085 . World Bank, 2018. What A Waste 2.0. . https://openknowledge. worldbank.org/handle/10986/30317 . World Bank, 2017. World Bank Open Data Population Density. . https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.POP.DNST . . World Economic Forum, 2016. We can recycle everything we use, including cigarette butts and toothbrushes. So Why Don ’t We? . . https://www. weforum.org/agenda/2016/10/we-can-recycle-everything-we-use-so-why-don-t-we/ . Yeo, Z., Masi, D., Low, J.S.C., Ng, Y.T., Tan, P.S., Barnes, S., 2019. Tools for promoting industrial symbiosis: a systematic review. J. Ind. Ecol. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec. 12846 . Young, C.-Y., Ni, S.-P., Fan, K.-S., 2010. Working towards a zero waste environment in Taiwan. Waste Manage. Res. 28, 236 –244. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 0734242X09337659 . Zaman, A.U., 2015. A comprehensive review of the development of zero waste man- agement: lessons learned and guidelines. J. Clean. Prod. 91, 12 –25.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.12.013 . Zhang, L., Xu, Z., 2016. A review of current progress of recycling technologies for metals from waste electrical and electronic equipment. J. Clean. Prod. 127, 19 –36.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.004 . Zheng, P., wang, H., Sang, Z., Zhong, R.Y., Liu, Y., Liu, C., Mubarok, K., Yu, S., Xu, X., 2018. Smart manufacturing systems for Industry 4.0: conceptual framework, sce- narios, and future perspectives. Front. Mech. Eng. China 13, 137 –150. https://doi. org/10.1007/s11465-018-0499-5 . Zhou, Y., Zhao, J., 2016. Assessment and planning of underground space use in Singapore. Tunn. Undergr. Sp. Technol. 55, 249 –256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tust. 2015.12.018 .P. Kerdlap, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 151  104438 19 

