The role of a socio-integrated recycling system in implementing a circular economy – The case of Belo Horizonte, Brazil Maryegli Fussa,⇑, Raphael T.V. Barrosb, Witold-Roger Poganietza aKarlsruhe Institute of Technology , Karlsruhe, Germany bFederal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil article info Article history: Received 14 October 2019 Revised 2 December 2020Accepted 3 December 2020Available online 28 December 2020 Keywords: Emerging economiesRecyclable solid wasteMaterial ﬂow analysisAgent-structure analysisWaste pickersabstract Waste pickers  are considered a strong suggestion to become practical mediators of the circular economy  in emerging economies. This new recommendation intends to strengthen WPs’ role inhousehold solid waste management while supporting the establishment of CE. Municipalities often do not recognize WPs as service providers and frequently discriminate against them. In such a challenging situation, could a socio-integrated recycling system with integrated WPs be a robust strategy to boost aCE? Belo Horizonte is a learning platform to answer this research question because this Brazilian city hasa long-term commitment to social integration. The work applies the combination of participatory obser- vation, multi-year material ﬂow analysis , and structural agent analysis  to identify allocative resources, legitimation, and cultural values that are fundamental to operationalizing CE. The MFA resultsshow a signiﬁcant increase in waste generation, but not more than 4% of recyclable waste generated could be collected as input for WP cooperatives. The number of WPs registered in cooperatives, the mar- ket price of recyclables, and regulatory legislation for packaging products are classiﬁed as barriers for thesuccessful extension of a socio-integrated recycling system identiﬁed in the SAA. This study suggests that knowing the target group  brings opportunities for WPs to disclose niches  and can potentially create socio-technical regimes to implement a conscious and sustainable CE. /C2112020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction The practice of circular economy  is a topic of debate in sci- entiﬁc and non-scientiﬁc circles ( Kalmykova et al., 2018; Kirchherr et al., 2017; Laurenti et al., 2018; Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019 ). The conceptual approach of circularity has opened different interpreta- tions, understandings, and thoughts to complement the economic and business orientation for industries that are aimed at the con- tinual use of resources while eliminating waste ( Foundation, 2019 ). One challenge is to embed socio-economic practices in CE initiatives at city levels ( Kirchherr et al., 2017; Laurenti et al., 2018; Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019 ). Many cities are pushed to restructure their household solid waste  management systems to a circular view ( Ghosh and Agamuthu, 2018; Haupt et al., 2017 ). European legislation, for example, claims phasing out the disposal of recyclable HSW (e.g., paper, plastic, glass, metal), preventing its generation, and/ortransforming it into new resources . This circu- larity view is expanding worldwide ( Ghosh and Agamuthu, 2018; Kirchherr et al., 2017 ). However, emerging economies often face a different situation. They generally follow basic sanitation policies without giving priorities or restrictions to HSW sorting and treat- ment systems ( Gutberlet et al., 2017; Hartmann, 2018; Welivita et al., 2015 ). The novelty is to create a frame to embed waste pick- ers  as mediators of the circular economy ( Gutberlet, 2018; Gutberlet et al., 2017; Rutkowski and Rutkowski, 2017; Velis, 2017 ). Waste picking is either a predominant or a prominent part of recovering recyclable resources in countries with ‘‘ﬁnancial con- straints,” ‘‘institutional failure,” and ”undeveloped treatment sys- tems” . Many citizens in those countries live under conditions of poverty and unstructured life; for the mismanage- ment of HSW, i.e., open dumpings and landﬁlling with mixed waste, they ﬁnd a proﬁtable solution to meet socio-economic needs . The embeddedness of WPs creates an unconventional reﬂection of the principles and aims of the circular economy. Municipalities often do not recognize WPs as service providers and frequently dis- criminate against them ( Azevedo et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2018; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2020.12.006 0956-053X/ /C2112020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.⇑Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: maryegli.fuss@kit.edu , raphael@desa.ufmg.br (R.T.V. Barros), poganietz@kit.edu .Waste Management 121  215–225 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Waste Management journal homepage: www.else vier.com/loc ate/wasman

Hartmann, 2018; Rateau and Tovar, 2019 ). In such a challenging situation, could a socio-integrated recycling system with inte- grated WPs be a robust strategy to boost a CE? Transparency regarding the deﬁnition  of the CE concept and socio-integrated recycling system is needed to answer the research question. According to Kirchherr et al.  ,‘‘The circularity approach seeks for an economic system that replaces the ‘end-of-life’ concept by reducing, alternatively reusing, recycling and recovering materials in production, distribution and consumption processes within the aim to accomplish sustainable development ”.Rutkowski and Rutkowski  considered a socio-integrated recycling system, i.e., ‘‘ the procedure of combining informal sectors in urban services by giving WPs socio-economic opportunities whereby the operational costs and environmental impacts of landﬁlling can be minimised ”. Beneﬁts exist in favor of a socio-integrated recycling system, but economic prosperity is still the primary aim of the CE and might imply tradeoffs in terms of economic growth .Kirchherr et al.  have correlated CE as an approach toward sustainability to bring the perspective that is considered in this study, and which stands for creating environmental quality, economic prosperity and social equity, to the beneﬁt of current and future generations simultaneously ”. The integration of WPs in circularity initiatives is an issue to be analyzed on a local scale. The situation of WPs can differ among countries or cities because of, for example, legal issues, social behavior, and culture. Belo Horizonte is a learning platform to answer the research question mentioned above. Belo Horizonte is Brazil’s fourth economic axis and a reliable reference for the orga- nizational structure of WPs into cooperatives worldwide ( Alfaia et al., 2017; Campos, 2014; IBGE, 2018; Tirado-Soto and Zamberlan, 2013; UN-HABITAT, 2014 ). Through the study case, this paper aims to analyze the socio-integration development of indi- vidual groups that directly execute or inﬂuence an action in HSW management and to discuss the barriers that WP communities face towards the circular economy’s purposes. The work applies the combination of participant observation , material ﬂow analysis , and structural agent analysis  developed by Binder . The methodological approach brings the focus on the role of agents sel- dom studied in HSW management and is fundamental for opera- tionalizing CE ( Bugge et al., 2019; Marshall and Farahbakhsh, 2013 ). This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the back- ground information of Belo Horizonte’s case study. Section 3 outli- nes the methodological framework and the respective research steps carried out in this study. Section 4 presents the results of the case study and the discussion. Sections 5 and 6 summarize the conclusions. 2. A literature review about the situation of Belo Horizonte Belo Horizonte, the capital of Minas Gerais’ state, is located in southeast Brazil with a population of about 2.5 million  and an average growth rate of 0.6% per year since 2001 ( IBGE, 2018 ). The mainstays of its economy range over all three economic sectors, with iron and steel mining industries, packaging, food, biotechnology, business, and tourism jewelry as the main branches. Belo Horizonte is characterized by high social inequalities, with a Gini coefﬁcient of 0.60 . This socio-economic situa- tion is reﬂected by the high relevance of informal collecting and sorting of HSW . Belo Horizonte launched its Munic- ipal Solid Waste Plan in 2017, after three years of the target having been deﬁned by the Brazilian National Policy on Solid Waste . NPSW is a political action for munic- ipalities to pay attention to the mismanagement of HSW and the integration of WP cooperatives . The plan is based on the status quo of Belo Horizonte’s HSW management in 2014 . Belo Horizonte presents an advantage regarding the integration of WP cooperatives in com- parison to other Brazilian cities. Belo Horizonte had the ﬁrst polit- ical initiative to recognize waste pickers as agents of HSW management in the 1990s ( Campos 2014; Jacobi and Teixeira 1997 ). The political initiative demonstrated the working value of WPs, who were often confused as being part of the marginalized groups of that time, and caused a social and political movement nationally and internationally .Campos  described how Belo Horizonte’s political initiative opened opportu- nities in line with Eco 92 and helped to establish social and govern-mental programs such as ‘‘Garbage and Citizenship” and the ‘‘National Forum Garbage and Citizenship”. Both programs aimed to promote campaigns against child labor in dumpsites and partic- ipative dialogue between governments and WPs funded by the United Nations Children’s Funds and the Brazilian government in 1997 and 2000, respectively . No technological treatment takes place in Belo Horizonte, as shown in Fig. 1 . The conventional system relies on landﬁlling after HSW is reloaded into larger vehicles at the transfer station ( SLU, 2014 ). Consequently, the long-term collection of mixed waste motivated social interventions in HSW management activities accompanied by constant popular movements ( Rutkowski, 2008; Varella, 2011 ). The recycling network system started with CataUni- dos in 2004. The recycling network systems promote joint action for marketing and technical support to reduce the inﬂuences of the informal sector ( Tirado-Soto and Zamberlan, 2013; Varella, 2011 ). As shown in Fig. 1 , the formal and the informal waste sec- tors still run in parallel in Belo Horizonte. The informal sector helps small and medium-sized middlemen businesses by creating the opportunity to generate fast income by selling recyclable waste at the lowest market prices . The difference between the formal  WP cooperatives and the informal sector is the services that formal WP cooperatives provide for the city hall of Belo Horizonte. They perform door-to- door collection followed by sorting of recyclables at working sheds . Thus, for formal WPs, not only the economic aspect of waste collecting and sorting is of relevance, but also their posi- tion in the society as service providers for the city ( Rutkowski, 2008; Rutkowski and Rutkowski, 2015; Varella, 2011 ). It is due to a signiﬁcant gap regarding the efﬁciency of the socio-integrated recycling system that many decision-makers con- sider the Belo Horizonte HSW management to be stagnating . New perspectives from industries bring hope for WP cooperatives to create best practices for the socio- integrated system in the context of a circular economy ( Ometto et al., 2018 ). Although the socio-integrated system is part of the national policy , industries and Belo Horizonte’s city council remain locked in a stalemate when it comes to invest- ing in HSW management. 3. Research method and data 3.1. Overview This study carried out three main stages that enable an in-depth analysis of the dynamics of a real-life setting of the case study cho- sen, as displayed in Fig. 2 . The ﬁrst stage aimed to disclose the characteristics of the system under review in-depth and to gather primary data. This step followed the qualitative method approach of participatoryM. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 216 observation  to obtain an understanding and direct contact with the status quo of Belo Horizonte’s city and its HSW management. The analysis started with prolonged ﬁeldwork done in 2014 carried out by one of the researchers  and supported by a native researcher. The ﬁrst method approach  helped the team to confront informa-tion from the literature review  and the different views of a native from an observer of the situation. It enabled the authors to identify issues and agents and to familiarizethemselves with the formal and informal activities and interac- tions, such as unplanned activities. Mainly, WPs were observed as to how they were acting during day-to-day activities. Their historical backgrounds and beliefs were taken into account in interviews. The producers of household solid wastes were also investigated. Different parts of the city were visited to ﬁnd outmainly how the society acts regarding waste generation, integra- tion of WPs, and satisfaction with the current HSW management situation. The study’s ﬁrst stage was documented through Fig. 1. Belo Horizonte’s HSW management in 2014. Processes are part of the descriptions presented in Varella  and SLU . Fig. 2. Research method stages based on a combination of participatory observation and MFA-SAA. Stages adapted from .M. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 217 pictures and recorded videos to be used in the subsequent research processes. One of the researchers of the study (the one who conducted the participatory observation) became integrated in the Waste and Citizenship Forum of Belo Horizonte. His involvement lead to the establishment of a platform of communication with about 34 agents of Belo Horizonte. This platform was essential for develop- ing structural agent analysis . Direct contact with local agents enabled us to gain access to historical annual reports done by the city hall and WP cooperatives. These reports helped to build a data platform of a multi-year material ﬂow analysis . This study analyzed a time range of 10 years. It considered the transition before the implementation of recycling networks  and the reference year  of the Municipal Solid Waste Plan (see Sec- tion 2 ). The targets presented in the Municipal Solid Waste Plan and the semi-structured interviews with the agents supplemented the interpretation of MFA-SAA to provide an up-to-date discussion of the ﬁndings . 3.2. Detailed characterization of MFA-SAA While MFA is well established in the ﬁeld of waste manage- ment, agent analysis is a common tool in the ﬁeld of sociology (Binder, 2007a; Graedel, 2019; Long, 2004; Moriguchi and Hashimoto, 2016 ). This paper is related to the combined issues identiﬁed in recyclable materials ﬂow analysis, and the social impacts of urban systems predominated by WPs. Thus, it is neither a single analytical analysis  nor a sociological analysis  per se . The application of MFA-SAA helped to investigate the rela- tionship between agents and structural mechanisms by recogniz- ing conﬂicts driven by economic, sociological, and psychological issues. Especially regarding the development of cities, decision- makers have problems in understanding the physical results pro- vided by an MFA because the results are derived from conﬂicts of actions by agents . Thus, MFA-SAA was developed to overcome the need to integrate the impact of social structures  on human actions to assist decision-makers in understanding, in a practical manner, the systematic assessment of MFA ( Binder, 2007a, b; Brunner and Rechberger, 2004 ). One challenge identiﬁed in analyzing the city of Belo Horizonte is that there are no precise system boundaries when taking into account the circularity approach of recyclable materials. The scope of this study entailed that each agent corresponded to a ‘‘physical system”, according to the conceptual framework for MFA-SAA . However, the society of Belo Horizonte is exposed to all products available at the national level, i.e., the modeling approach focused on various consumer packaging products. Thisapproach provided an in-depth analysis of the material ﬂow sector, legislation, and market regarding the product value chain. At the city level, MFA follows Belo Horizonte’s recyclable HSW management , which allows quantifying recyclable waste generation, sorting routes, treatment, and disposal. Sorting rates follow the split into closed- and open-loop collection rates following the recommendations of ISO 14044  and reported inHaupt et al.  . Closed-loop recycling pursues recyclables that can still substitute original resources for the traditional pro- cessing industry while recyclables from open-loop recycling aim at a different type of resources for any other undeﬁned industrial process . From the participatory observation  and MFA results, three major steps constituted the SAA  in this study: I. Classiﬁcation of the relevant agents, i.e., integration of out- comes from the participatory observation according to their impact on the variables driving the MFA system. For exam-ple, WPs are already pre-deﬁned agents of this study. The sorting processes of recyclable materials relate directly to them, affecting, for example, the aluminum can ﬂows; II. Breakdown of structural factors into allocative resources , legitimation (e.g., legislation for collectivism, production of packaging materials, recycling), and cultural values (e.g., sig- niﬁcance of traditions the WPs live in). At the level of WP cooperatives, the drivers and motivators for the behavior model of the socio-recycling system are investigated. Fol- lowing behavioral economics, the psychological approach that drives WPs was analyzed and interpreted ( Hoff and Walsh, 2018; Madrian, 2014 ); III. Visualization of the SAA outcomes through the agent- structure diagram. The diagram shows the structural factorsdriving agents’ actions and interactions. Details of the MFA-SAA modeling framework can be found in the supporting information S1. 3.3. Data management The application of MFA-SAA requires two types of data, and, thus, two types of data gathering. Local reports are the background data to build the HSW management system for Belo Horizonte. Additionally, national reports provided secondary data for recy- clable packaging production for food industries. This study followed the MFA principle that total production in mass matches the total consumption demand , while total consumption must correspond to the total post- consumption  ( Brunner and Rechberger, 2004 ). Thereby, the transformation of packaging cate- gories  into waste products  moves across the sys- tem and vice versa. The disaggregation procedures applied the same reasonable hypothesis based on the technique introduced byCourtonne et al. : ‘‘consumption is almost propor- tional to the population growth”. For instance, the consumption of glass  at a local scale would be: Ui¼U/C3ki kð1Þ where Uistands for consumption of a product, here glass, in region i in tons, Ufor nationwide consumption of the product in tons, kifor the population of the corresponding region i, and kstands for the total population of the country under investigation, here of Brazil. The index istands for Belo Horizonte. Likewise, a relatively high data uncertainty is identiﬁed when the mass balance model is developed for both the years of 2004and 2014. This study pays attention to this drawback by analyzing the uncertainties of the data input for MFA. The methodological approach follows the method presented by Laner and colleagues , which combines data classiﬁcation and exponential-type uncertainty characterization functions. The MFA models for 2004 and 2014 are built using the free platform sub- STance ﬂow ANalysis  . Table 1 sums up the primary data sources used for MFA. All equa- tions and process descriptions are available in the supplementary material. The SAA follows the qualitative approach based on semi- structured interviews and secondary data to determine the alloca- tive resources, legitimation, and cultural values. The output of par- ticipatory observation helped to fulﬁll the ﬁrst and second steps of SAA . For example, after the ﬁeldwork, semi- structured interviews were often conducted with NGOs, public authorities, waste pickers, local recycling industries, and local HSW researchers to analyze the prolonged individual relationshipsM. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 218 with other agents within the recyclable materials chain. Regulation structures were identiﬁed according to the sorting products dis- cussed with WP cooperatives and NGOs. The agent diagram was reviewed with experts on the ﬁeld of HSW management and sys- tem analysis. Table 2 describes the main data sources used for SAA. 4. Results The ﬁndings of the participatory observations  are inte- grated into the results of the MFA-SAA and are presented as fol- lows. Pictures of the participatory observation and the MFA diagrams can be found in the supplementary material. 4.1. Recyclable waste ﬂows and the impact on the circularity approach The MFA started from the perspective to certify the amount of waste generated in Belo Horizonte by households and commercial places. Between 2004 and 2014, the total recyclable waste genera- tion increased from about 195 kt to 260 kt, respectively, by an average growth of 2.9% each year. The main reasons for the growth are rapidly increasing incomes , higher demands for recyclable products, and a growing population. In the same period, the net accumulation increased from 11 kt  to 15 kt . The composition of the recyclable waste changed in due course . Although plastics, particularly PETs and PEs, are los-ing relevance  share to 30%  of the total generation), the growth rate of 49% is highly signiﬁcant. Paper waste, in total, is outperforming the general development of waste generation  with an annual growth of 7.2% in contrast to a 5.2% growth in plastics. The overall collection rate of Belo Horizonte improved from 92%  to 96% . Therefore, not more than 4% of recyclable waste could be assigned  to WP cooperatives for both years, i.e. in 2004, about 6.6 kt  and 11.3 kt  in 2014.The remaining fraction is collected together with the wet waste and disposed of in landﬁll sites. The organization of the socio-cooperatives in recycling net- works shows the impact of changes in the input ﬂows on recycling processes. WP cooperatives are becoming more professionalized. Each member has assumed a labor division of collecting (selective collection), sorting , mechan- ical recycling , and assisting the ofﬁce staff. Their participation in selective collection has supported min- imization of the impurities usually related to sand or stones used as ﬁlling to add to the weight of aluminum cans, and the commu- nication of the quality conditions of cleanliness regarding card- board. Such attitudes reﬂected that 48% of the total material sorted by WP cooperatives could be assigned to the closed-loop recycling system in 2014 . The largest share corre- sponds to aluminum cans , followed by PET bottles  and cardboard . Both aluminum cans and cardboard always have been considered the easiest to identify recyclables and theTable 1 Data source for MFA. MFA Data demand Data type Data source Scale identiﬁed Physical supply of packaging materials produced in BrazilAnnual report and databaseBrazilian Association of Packaging and Brazilian Institute of Statistics national Trade of packaging materials  Annual reports Brazilian Association of Packaging  national Consumption of packaging materials Annual reports Brazilian Associations: Metals , PET-Plastic , Glass , Paper ,Plastic , Aluminium cans national Waste collection and treatment Empirical data Superintendence of Urban Cleaning of Belo Horizonte  local Waste sorting Empirical data Waste pickers’ cooperatives records local Recycling indexes Annual report Brazilian Associations  and local recycling industries local/nationalSocio-economic entries  Statistics Brazilian Institute of Statistics  Secretariat for Strategic Affairs regional/local Table 2 Data source for SAA. SAA Issues discussed Method Involved agents Recyclable waste collected in the sheds, sorting preferences, the ratio of recyclables rejectedSemi-structured interviews  Informal waste pickers; leader of WP cooperatives; NGOs Main problems of HSW management Semi-structured interviews (face to face and phone University professors; public authorities; third- party companies The needs for a socio-integrated sorting system Round table discussion  Waste pickers; NGOs, PhD students; funding organizations; neighborhood representatives Structure of national, regional, and local regulations Semi-structured interviews (phone and video conference)University professors; NGOs; public authorities Strategies for HSW management Public authorities Cultural values of WPs Formal waste pickers; NGOs; university professor Structure of market and legislation for recyclable materialsLeader of WP cooperatives; recycling industries Market preference of recyclable materials Leader of WP cooperatives; recycling industries Results of agent analysis University professors; expert in system analysis; NGOs; funding organizationM. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 219 cleanest compared to any other recyclable wastes. The difference between both waste products is the strong market demand for alu- minum cans, with their market price being around R$ 4.00/kg in contrast to that of cardboard of R$ 0.22/kg in 2014 ( CEMPRE, 2018 ). PET bottles have become attractive for WP cooperatives in Belo Horizonte because of an increased generation and competi- tion for aluminum cans within the informal sector. Wherever pos- sible, closed-loop recycling was indicated following the recycling rates of aluminum , cardboard , and PET associations . However, the recycling net- work systems reported the logistic challenge of trading directly with these primary production industries. In the metropolitan region of Belo Horizonte, only preprocessing recycling industries exist (e.g., smelting aluminum, shredding PET, and crushing card- board bales), whilst the largest ﬁnal product industries are located in Rio de Janeiro , Sao Paulo , and Curitiba . Open-loop recycling gives the opportunity for recycling net- works to directly start the trade of sorted recyclables with small to medium-sized recycling companies without the intervention of middlemen, as was common in 2004. The challenge the formal WP cooperatives face is the low quality of recyclable waste received from third-party companies that are responsible for the selective collection. WP cooperatives conﬁrmed that an average of 40% of the recyclable waste was rejected after coarse and ﬁne sorting; there were no signiﬁcant changes in the quality of waste received by service companies over the years. Therefore, after the recycling network systems, WP cooperatives discovered a new col- laboration with the retail trade sector (e.g., hypermarkets and shopping centers) to obtain a better quality of recyclable waste, especially paper waste. Thus, compressed bales of sorted paper are underestimated  in small companies of toilet paper and tissue production that belong to the trade network of the recycling networks. The purpose of CataUnidos started in 2014 is the mechanical transformation of colored PET, Pes, and PP into pellets. Based onthe number of WPs in cooperatives and the share of metals in total waste input for the recycling networks, it is estimated that 14% of the open-loop recycling of plastics  were transformed into pellets and later designated to the steel industry as a substi- tute for coke. The remaining fraction is supposed to be commer- cialized with textile and unsaturated and alkyd resin industries in the metropolitan region. A speciﬁc share of plastic bales desig- nated for each industry is unknown. Glass waste has been considered a troublesome material. Belo Horizonte has more than 12,000 food kiosks (e.g., bars and infor- mal food meal spots), being the largest Brazilian reference where the local population and tourists socialize . Such com- mercial activities explain the growing rate of glass waste by 66% . Therefore, WP cooperatives who sorted glass (e.g., bottles) let the glass accumulate at their sheds because a market for such material did not exist. The crushing process to minimizethe cargo volume for transportation to glass industries located in other states  is a barrier faced by recycling networks. 4.2. The socio-integrated recycling system in the view of SAA The SAA results showed that HSW creates a contradicting effect, and the role of each involved agent presents fragments of signiﬁ- cance in Belo Horizonte. For WPs who are members of a formal cooperative sorting waste brings opportunities to guarantee a bet- ter educational system for future generations. On the other hand, many citizens consider waste sorting a time-consuming task because the city hall service providers  mix HSW during conventional collection. Nevertheless, in general, householders do not assume the responsibility of collaborating to improve the local system. There are different legislations without interconnection. This reﬂects how allocative resources (e.g., the market price of recyclables and the income of WPs) are controlled. The overall responsibility of HSW management is with the city council, while formal WPs have raised the jurisdiction issue toTable 3 Composition of Belo Horizonte recyclable waste vs. output of WPs cooperatives . Waste product Generation1WP cooperatives2Recycling path 2004 2014 2004 2014 PET314 016 19 348 – 548 Closed-loop recycling4 HDPE311 346 15 663 403 411 Open-loop recycling5 LDPE325 362 35 011 PP35 340 7 371 18 20 Open-loop recycling PVC39 344 12 899 – – PS3101 106 – – EVA 11 18 – –Others 4 959 14 723 – – Total plastic 70 481 105 138 421 979 Ofﬁce paper 9 404 15 579 129 207 Open-loop recyclingMagazine and news 3 135 5 193 43 69 Open-loop recyclingCardboard 34 483 57 123 – 162 Closed-loop recyclingMulti-material tetrapack 3 135 5 193 – –Others 8 306 34 173 – –Total paper 58 463 117 261 172 438Aluminum can 1 567 2 596 – 1 235 Closed-loop recycling 3 Non-ferrous metal 7 837 12 982 275 410 Open-loop recyclingFerrous metal 4 644 9 548 673 468 Open-loop recyclingTotal metal 14 048 25 127 948 2 113Total Glass 23 511 38 947 –– Other recyclables 628 219 68 933 –– 1Uncertainties of data input vary from 15% to 31%. The most uncertain data comes from the category of metals . 2Uncertainties of data input vary from 22% to 45%. The most uncertain data comes from the category of metals . 3PET: Polyethylene terephthalate; HDPE ; LDPE ; PP ; PVC ; PS ; EVA . 4Closed-loop recycling indicates the sorting process for a possible primary-purpose application . 5Open-loop recycling shows the sorting process for any further secondary application . 6Any other type of recyclable materials such as rubber, textile, wood, and tinplates.M. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 220 assume the selective collection responsibility instead of third- party companies. The agent-structure diagram  provides a visualization of how Belo Horizonte’s agents  interact according to the structural elements  identi- ﬁed. The arrows indicate the relationship of agents demanding ser- vices associated with ﬂows of materials  or technical assistance  such as standards, knowledge, and rights. At the same time, industries play a direct or indirect role by demanding high-quality sorting of recyclables, while leading enterprises assist with setting technical standards. The core of the socio-integrated recycling system is the consol- idation of waste pickers in HSW management, the central agent shown in the structure diagram . Two pairs of regulatory structures drive agents’ actions: culture & legislation (a robust local characteristic), and market mechanism & legislation . The culture & legislation mechanism represent the merger of cul- tural values and legitimation. It consolidates the position of WPs today as the outcome of a long-lasting historical process symbol- ized by political persecution and discrimination from the Belo Hor- izonte’ society. The Street Charity Pastoral (locally known as ‘‘Pastoral da Rua ”) substantially participated in the socio- integrated system in Belo Horizonte . The church community was primarily for providing educational awareness campaigns to minimize the marginalized view of WPs. It protected them against violent attacks (often tolerated by the city council) and intermediated the process to claim their rights more effectively among decision-makers in the 90s . Nowadays, they mediate the integration of infor- mal WPs into legalized cooperatives together with NGOs . In 2004, no prescribed number of WPs is registered. There are eight cooperatives with about 312 WPs in Belo Horizonte regis- tered in 2014. The formal WP cooperatives differ regarding the number of members, ranging from 20 to 100. Since then, they have all been integrated into recycling network systems, formed by two organizational structures named CataUnidos, as previously men- tioned, and RedeSol. Both organizations aim to create socio- entrepreneurship induced by NGOs  or are self- organized . They mainly act where selective collection occurs. In 2014, selective collection reached 36 of 417 neighbor- hoods and serviced about 15% of the total population. Table 4 sum- marizes the speciﬁc characteristics that differentiate between the two recycling networks’ daily work performances and subsequentroles in HSW management. The enactment of the NPSW  and the national decree for social inclusion  came to regulate the socio-integrated recycling system by conceding WPs as a recog- nized profession determining the recycling process and giving pri- ority to socio-entrepreneurship of WP cooperatives. Within the scope of the NPSW, different funding programs such as Pro- Collector and Cataforte and the National Secretary of Solidarity Economy opened the opportunity to consolidate the recycling net- work systems by giving CataUnidos, for example, the infrastructure conditions to establish a plastic pellets facility in 2014. The integrated social system in Belo Horizonte differs from that of other Brazilian cities that failed to implement the socio- Fig. 3. Agent structure diagram within the scope of the socio-integrated recycling system. Adapted SAA diagram based on Binder .M. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 221 integrated model due to trust . The cultural behavior of both recycling networks reinforces the commitment of ‘‘together we can act better”. The collectivism and solidarity commitment constitutes the primary internal understanding of the cooperatives’ members, who assist one another through training, and support the participatory events through the external embeddedness of WP cooperatives in front of local and Brazilian societies. All members and the cooperative need to follow the normative law for a cooperative system , the statute for WPs , and the respec- tive amendments reported in the local union legislation. Recycling networks regulate the cooperatives while the cooperatives regu- late WPs according to requirements, as follows : I. no child labor; II. WPs must be registered at a cooperative; III. legalized WP cooperative or in the process of legalization with a ﬁxed address; IV. equitable participation without the dictate of rules; V. ban of trade with middlemen (considered as an action against reciprocity and commitment to collectivism); VI. promoting physical security  and payment from the Brazilian Social Security Institute for Retirement ; VII. being approved after the application for a membership at an assembly. The exploitation of other WPs by dictating rules and the trading outside of the market network  are the pri- mary reasons that usually cancel the membership of WPs and WP cooperatives in the network systems. The integration of informal WPs into the cooperative is consid- ered a challenge. The proﬁle of Belo Horizonte’s informal waste pickers reﬂects the social identity described by Souza  as the ‘‘riff-raff” class. They are extremely poor citizens, according to the national socio-economic classiﬁcation . They are part of the 1.4% of Belo Horizonte’s population, who have been out of the job market for a long time . But they still hope to ﬁnd moonlighting jobs and to leave the business of waste picking. These citizens are skeptical about the cooperative system due to many other social disturbances (e.g., drug use, alco- holism, and homelessness). Nevertheless, they ﬁnd waste picking the last worthy chance for obtaining quick daily income rather than turning to delinquency. Market mechanism & legislation describe the allocative resources and legitimation. They determine the recycling path, which lackstransparency among local agents because legislation is deﬁned at the national level. Federal law imposed by the National Sanitary Surveillance Agency  and technical standards for industrial processes standardization  regulate packag- ing products for food and beverage industries (the primary source of HSW). The federal packaging legislation follows international market regulations (e.g., Mercosul and American Food and Drug Administration - FDA) to guarantee national consumption and export of packaging for goods as well as packaged food and bever- age . For instance, the FDA permits food industries to use PP and HDPE as secondary sources from industrial processes that follow the patent technologies roadmap with a controlled sup- ply chain . The supply of secondary resources cannot be ensured due to the challenge between the public sector and industry regarding theresponsibilities for recycling costs. WP cooperatives are responsi- ble for transportation and cannot afford long distances. There are patterns to follow for some recyclable products in Brazil. Closed- loop recycling is allowed for metal and glass packaging because of their high durability, mechanical resistance (without losing quality), and well-set standardized decontamination procedures . Paper and PET were included on the list for closed-loop recycling with some additional restrictions controlled by ANVISA in 2008 . For instance, multi-layers are regulated for the use of PET and paper secondary resources, where recycled PET and paper must not have direct contact with food and beverage contents . Under this circumstance, regu- lations imposed by ANVISA are seen as a bureaucracy for packaging industries that use mainly secondary resources originating from the industrial output ( ABIPET, 2018; BRACELPA, 2015 ). Closed-loop recycling from HSW management is a low attrac- tion for investment for large-scale packaging industries, although the prices of primary resources  are increasing . An exception is the Brazilian Association for Aluminum Cans , which in the recycling process found an alternative method for minimizing energy demand and the dependence on the primary sector by investing in closed-loop recycling countrywide. Because of that, many WP cooperatives in Belo Horizonte became exclusively ‘‘alu- minum can pickers‘‘ creating a highly competitive system. On the other hand, Brazil became the country worldwide leading in recy- cled aluminum cans . Quite the opposite hap- pened in the case of the glass beverage industries, where returning glass bottles to the producer was stiﬂed. Returnable glass bottles was the market strategy implemented by speciﬁc beverage brand industries that started in the 1980s and continued until 2005 . This strategy has been lost because of substi- tution for plastic bottles, lack of investment into collection sta-tions, and the decrease in prices of raw materials, which do not make recycling attractive . Although it was a com- mercial strategy, returnable glass bottles were well accepted as a successful engagement of society in Belo Horizonte. A market mechanism for open-loop recycling is growing, and new products are becoming attractive for sorting at WP coopera- tives. With the interest in opening new businesses, small enter- prises look for purchasing good-quality recyclables (mainly paper and plastic) from the recycling networks by sometimes offering them the transportation service as a bonus. 5. Discussion The results of this study combined insights from bottom-up  and top-down  methods to discuss the approach of the research question presented in Section 1 . The CE approach calls for mechanisms and policyTable 4 Organizational structure of Belo Horizonte’s recycling networks. CataUnidos RedeSol Strategy of cooperatives Expansionist Concentrated Function of waste pickers Member Service provider Handcrafting activities Existent NoneInteraction between cooperative Large FewPerformance of functionalities Rotational CompetenceShare of income Equitable Weight sorted/month Adaptation to a new technical instrument Slow Fast Partnership with the city yes yes Partnership with recycling industry Providers of secondarymaterialStill under development Foundation of 1st cooperative Since 1992 Since 2002 Number of WP cooperatives from Belo Horizonte15 Number of partner WP cooperatives from the metropolitan region33 7M. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 222 instruments from a top-down perspective , but actions happen at the city level . No agreement could consolidate these different scales, agents, and interests, for optimal development. MFA-SAA results showed that waste generation increases in Belo Horizonte. The number of formal WPs is low. According to Table 3 , each member achieved an average of sorted recyclables of 1071.78 kg/month, excluding rejects in 2014. National statistics stand that such average capacity demonstrates the low efﬁciency of the WP cooperatives and the need for a better infrastructure to achieve an average of 1800 kg/month based on the national standard for high efﬁciency . WP cooperatives have limited support to boost their strategies because recycling net- works face the challenge of the low quality of recyclable wastes received and a large number of recyclables disposed of withoutpre-treatment in Belo Horizonte. Local industries usually ﬁnd other accessible alternatives without the involvement of HSW manage- ment. The bureaucracy and contamination constraints impede the recyclable loop from being closed. The macro-scale perspective of the CE concept makes it a new buzzword in the discourse of integrating WPs. Recyclable HSW is becoming highly competitive because of numerous recycling options, and recycling networks can be smothered if they remain between industries and the city council due to a clash of interests. Recycling networks are built based on social values that create niches for breaking economic and technical barriers and pushing them to claim rights. The embeddedness of WPs in CE needs to consider further limitations. The infrastructure of CataUnidos and RedeSol is precarious. Working sheds are small and need refurbish- ment. A formal WP cooperative is usually made up of 70% women and 30% men, most from 30 to 59 years old with incomplete pri- mary education backgrounds . Many women described private issues  that limited them from entering the market during an early stage of their lives, and recy- clable waste opened new socio-economic paths. 1The beliefs are the primary motivation to bring them together. Members of CataU- nidos described their wishes to ‘‘give a prosperous future to their children far away from the marginality within a better educational perspective”. Such commitment brings cultural values of collec- tivism and solidarity to the same work platform. Additionally, it is seen that reciprocity exists by creating attitudes of friendship between the recycling networks, although they have different orga- nizational structures . However, a CE focused on the future development of society ) could open opportunities. Recycling networks need to focus on a target group  or become independent recycling companies. Industries require a controlled supply chain of secondary resources . CataUnidos has shown positive initia- tives for urban industrial symbiosis within plastic pellet produc- tion. Plastic pellets are an alternative to fossil resources in the steel industry, which is one of the most energy-intensive industries and one of the largest CO 2emitters in Brazil . Such an attitude is seen in this study as a positive balance of the two worlds : lower emissions from indus- tries and less plastic landﬁlled. Professional assistance is needed to support WP cooperatives by identifying industrial needs or determining how to build a controlled supply chain. The city council requires trustful services with low costs to assume the selective collection system. Selective collection is the most costly process, and it does not cover the entire city of BeloHorizonte . New alternatives need to be found that are not accounted for in the management plan of Belo Horizonte . For instance, door-to-door selective collection per recyclable category done by WPs could be a new regulation. Such initiative would create interventions to support society’s adoption of better rules for sorting waste. Self-sufﬁcient recycling companies demand new products (open- loop recycling) in the market. Small enterprises start after the ini- tiative to become WP cooperatives. Most of them are composed of handicraft persons or technicians who develop new products from waste. Such path requests more funding programs on a national scale by offering equal opportunities in both technological and capacity building. In general, for any functioning system focused on a target group, a fair market price for recyclable waste needs to be regu-lated by giving value to the workload and efforts provided by WPs. Besides that, the number of waste cooperatives needs to increase. Nowadays, an average of 2412 (based on national statis- tics 2) to 33,766 citizens (based on the socioeconomic classiﬁcation for extremely poor citizens) could be informal WPs. The barrier of implicit discrimination requires considerable efforts to minimize psychological challenges . 6. Conclusion The ﬁndings of this study conﬁrm that a CE approach can be too broad to boost socio-integrated systems for HSW management if it is taken at a macro scale. The macro perspective of the CE concept obscures the real problem, procedures, challenges, and even tar- gets. The application of participatory observation merged into MFA-SAA presented the dynamics of real-life settings that threaten to prevent putting into practice the CE approach in Belo Horizonte, Brazil. The MFA results showed quantitatively that the challenge starts with waste generation increasing from about 195 kt to 260 kt between 2004 and 2014. The SAA discussed the regulatory structures that encompass cultural values (grounded on collec- tivism, solidarity, and reciprocity), market mechanisms, and legis- lation constraints. The number of WPs registered in cooperatives, the market price set up by recycling companies, regulatory legisla- tion for packing products, and new small enterprises promoting open-loop recycling are among the identiﬁed barriers that create obstacles for development of the socio-integrated system within the practice of CE. WPs are part of society in constant development crossing cul- tures and behaviors from country to country, city to city, or even neighborhood to neighborhood. This study discussed suggestions that can apply to other cities. For instance, knowing the target group brings opportunities for WPs to disclose niches (based on a small network of agents with expectations and visions) and can create socio-technical regimes to implement a conscious and sus- tainable CE. Therefore, changes (e.g., adapting the approach close to primary industries) need to be considered along with the trans- formation processes. Given the growing role of waste generation in emerging economies, there is a need to develop a salubrious work- ing environment for those people that are committed, with an aware or unaware behavior, to collaborating with a practical approach to the CE. Also, effective communication and mutual understanding of the vulnerabilities of socio-integrated recyclingsystems need to be further developed, and the single view on cost-saving needs to be minimized to create trends to act on sus- tainable and local CE. 1The number of women in the workforce grew from the year 2000, reaching 40% of the economically active population from 25% in Brazil in the 1980s. Andrade, A.S.C.,2004. Women in the Brazilian job market, PhD Thesis ed., Campinas.2Dagnino and Johansen  provide a prescription that 1 in every 1000 Brazilians is a waste picker and from each 10 waste-pickers, 7 remains in theinformality.M. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 223 Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgments The ﬁrst author thanks the National Council for Scientiﬁc and Technology Development  for the doctorate fellowship. The authors acknowledge the Department of Environmental and Sanitary Engineering of the University of Minas Gerais (DESA- UFMG) for supporting this research during the ﬁeldwork. The authors extend their appreciations to the assistance of Prof. Fran- cisco Lima and their working groups as well as the Nenuca Institute  and SLU. Finally, we would like to thank Hei- demarie Knierim  for her English corrections. All remain- ing mistakes and inaccuracies stay in the responsibility of the authors. References ABIPET, 2018. Brazilian PET Industry. http://www.abipet.org.br/index.html? method=mostrarInstitucional&id=72 . ABPO, 2014. Brazilian Association of Cardboard. http://www.abpo.org.br/ . ABRALATAS, 2018. Brazilian Association of Aluminium cans producers. http://www. abralatas.org.br/ . (Accessed 26.07.2019. ABRE, 2015. Brazilian Association of Packaging: Physical production of Packagings. ABRE, Sao Paulo . Alfaia, R.G.d.S.M., Costa, A.M., Campos, J.C., 2017. Municipal solid waste in Brazil: a review. Waste Manage. Res.: J. Int. Solid Wastes Public Cleansing Association, ISWA 35, 1195–1209. ANVISA, 1996. Permission or restriction of the use of recycled materials for food contact materials, RDC n. 27/1996, RDC n. 20/2007 ed. ANVISA, 2016. Law number 9782/99 and RDC n /C17691 de 11/05/2001 - Control of packaging products: 9782/99. p. 9782/9799. ASMARE, 2015. Socio-inclusion of waste pickers. Azevedo, B.D., Scavarda, L.F., Caiado, R.G.G., 2019. Urban solid waste management in developing countries from the sustainable supply chain management perspective: a case study of Brazil’s largest slum. J. Cleaner Prod. 233, 1377–1386 . Binder, C.R., 2007a. From material ﬂow analysis to material ﬂow management Part I: social sciences modeling approaches coupled to MFA. J. Cleaner Prod. 15 , 1596–1604 . Binder, C.R., 2007b. From material ﬂow analysis to material ﬂow management Part II: the role of structural agent analysis. J. Cleaner Prod. 15 , 1605–1617 . Bouças, C., 2017. Beverage industries try to to grow their product’s consumption with returnable glass bottles. ABIVIDRO, Sao Paulo . BRACELPA, 2015. Brazilian Association for Celullose and Paper - Sustainability report. http://www.sinpesc.com.br/images/publicacoes/02sustentabilidade.pdf . (Accessed 30.07.2019. BRASKEN, 2018. Price of plastic resins increases by 30%. http:// www.neoplastic.com.br/pt/noticias/noticias-do-site/braskem-sobe-preco-de- resinas-apos-alta-de-30 . (Accessed 13.08.2019. BRAZIL, 2006. Municipal solid waste management priorities for socio- entrepreneurship of WP cooperatives, 5940/06. BRAZIL, 2010a. National Policy on Cooperativism for the society.BRAZIL, 2010b. National Policy on Solid Waste Law 12,305/2010. BRAZIL. Brunner, P.H., Rechberger, H., 2004. Practical Handbook of Material Flow Analysis. CRC/Lewis, Boca Raton, FL . Bugge, M.M., Fevolden, A.M., Klitkou, A., 2019. Governance for system optimization and system change: the case of urban waste. Res. Policy 48 , 1076–1090 . Campos, H.K.T., 2014. Recycling in Brazil: challenges and prospects. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 85, 130–138 . Carvalho, P.S.L., Mesquita, P.P.D., Araújo, E.D.G., 2015. Sustainability of Brazilian steel industries: energy efﬁciency, emissions and competitiveness, 41 ed., pp. 181–236. CEMPRE, 2018. Market Price of Recyclables. CEMPRE, Sao Paulo . Cencic, O., Rechberger, H., 2008. Material Flow Analysis with Software STAN. Shaker, Aachen . Chen, F., Luo, Z., Yang, Y., Liu, G.-J., Ma, J., 2018. Enhancing municipal solid waste recycling through reorganizing waste pickers: a case study in Nanjing, China. Waste Manage. Res.: J. Int. Solid Wastes Public Cleansing Assoc., ISWA 36 , 767–778 . Commission, E., 2019. Waste and Circular Economy. Brussels. Courtonne, J.-Y., Alapetite, J., Longaretti, P.-Y., Dupré, D., Prados, E., 2015. Downscaling material ﬂow analysis: the case of the cereal supply chain in France. Ecol. Econ. 118, 67–80 .da Silva, L.R., 2018. Interview: Changes after the re-organization of waste pickers cooperatives into union organizations. In: da Silva, L.R. . Phone. Ferronato, N., Torretta, V., 2019. Waste mismanagement in developing countries: a review of global issues. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 16  . Foundation, E.M., 2019. Completing the Picture: How the Circular Economy Tackles Climate Change. Ellen MacArthur Foundation, pp. 20–24. Ghosh, S.K., Agamuthu, P., 2018. Circular economy: the way forward. Waste Manage. Res.: J. Int. Solid Wastes Public Cleansing Assoc., ISWA 36 , 481–482 . Graedel, T.E., 2019. Material ﬂow analysis from origin to evolution. Environ. Sci. Technol. Guerrero, L.A., Maas, G., Hogland, W., 2013. Solid waste management challenges for cities in developing countries. Waste Manage. 33 , 220–232 . Gutberlet, J., 2018. Waste in the city: challenges and opportunities for urban agglomerations. In: Ergen, M. , Urban Agglomeration. InTech . Gutberlet, J., Carenzo, S., Kain, J.-H., Martiniano, Mantovani, de Azevedo, A., 2017. Waste picker organizations and their contribution to the circular economy: two case studies from a global south perspective. Resources 6 , 52 . Hartmann, C., 2018. Waste picker livelihoods and inclusive neoliberal municipal solid waste management policies: the case of the La Chureca garbage dump site in Managua, Nicaragua. Waste Manage.  71, 565–577 . Haupt, M., Vadenbo, C., Hellweg, S., 2017. Do we have the right performance indicators for the circular economy?: Insight into the Swiss waste management system. J. Ind. Ecol. 21 , 615–627 . Hoff, K., Walsh, J., 2018. The whys of social exclusion: insights from behavioral economics. World Bank Res. Obser. 33 , 1–33 . HORIZONTE, B., 2017. Belo Horizonte Municipal Solid Waste Plan. 325. IBGE, 2015. Packaging production.. Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics https://www.ibge.gov.br/estatisticas/ economicas/industria/9324-indices- especiais-de-embalagen s.html?=&t=resultados . . IBGE, 2018. Belo Horizonte’s population and indexes. Instituto Brasileiro de Geograﬁa e Estatística, Brasilia . ISO, 2006. Environmental Management—Life Cycle Assessment-Principles and framework. International Organization for Standardization , Switzerland . Jacobi, P., Teixeira, M.A.C., 1997. Social capital: ASMARE - Waste Pickers Cooperative of paper, cardboard and recyclable resources of Belo Horizonte. CadernosGestao Pública e Cidadania. Kalmykova, Y., Sadagopan, M., Rosado, L., 2018. Circular economy – From review of theories and practices to development of implementation tools. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 190–201 . Kawulich, B.B., 2005. Participant observation as a data collection method. Forum: Qual. Soc. Res. 6  . Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., Hekkert, M., 2017. Conceptualizing the circular economy: an analysis of 114 deﬁnitions. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 127, 221–232 . Kugel, S., 2007. A town where all the world is a bar. https://www.nytimes.com/ 2007/10/28/travel/28next.html . (Accessed 26.09.2019. Laner, D., Feketitsch, J., Rechberger, H., Fellner, J., 2016. A novel approach to characterize data uncertainty in material ﬂow analysis and its application toplastics ﬂows in Austria. J. Ind. Ecol. 20 , 1050–1063 . Laurenti, R., Singh, J., Frostell, B., Sinha, R., Binder, C., 2018. The socio-economic embeddedness of the circular economy: an integrative framework. Sustainability 10 , 2129 . Long, N., 2004. Theoretical and methodology issues. In: Long, N. , Development sociology - Actors perspective. Taylor & Francis e-library, New York, pp. 7–73 . Madrian, B., 2014. Applying Insights from Behavioral Economics to Policy Design. Annual Review of Economics, Annual Reviews, Annual Reviews, pp. 663–688. Marshall, R.E., Farahbakhsh, K., 2013. Systems approaches to integrated solid waste management in developing countries. Waste Manage.  33 , 988–1003 . MNCR, 2017. Model for the Statute for Waste Pickers Cooperatives to adapt the Law.Moriguchi, Y., Hashimoto, S., 2016. Material Flow Analysis and Waste Management. 247-262. NBR, 2006. Recyclable plastic containers and packing, 13230. Ometto, A., Amaral, W.A., Iritani, D., Costa, J., 2018. Economia Circular: Oportunidades e desaﬁos para a indústria brasileira, Brasilia. Petri, R., 2018. Increase of price for cellulose. https://www.dci.com.br/industria/ preco-da-celulose-cresce-em-ritmo-mais-lento-e-pressiona-menos-o-papel-1. 675493 . (Accessed 30.07.2019. Rateau, M., Tovar, L., 2019. Formalization of wastepickers in Bogota and Lima: recognize, regulate, and then integrate? EchoGéo . Rutkowski, J., Rutkowski, E., 2017. Recycling in Brasil: paper and plastic supply chain. Resources 6 , 43 . Rutkowski, J.E., 2008. Sustainability of solidary enterprise: an approach on production engineering. Federal University of Rio de Janeiro . Rutkowski, J.E., Rutkowski, E.W., 2015. Expanding worldwide urban solid waste recycling: the Brazilian social technology in waste pickers inclusion. Waste Manage. Res.: J. Int. Solid Wastes Public Cleansing Assoc., ISWA 33 , 1084–1093 . SAE, 2014. Deﬁning the new socio-classes of Brazil. SLU, 2014. Annual monitoring reports of entire waste management of Belo Horizonte 2014. SLU, 2018. Annual Report of Municipal Solid Waste - 2001 to 2018. Souza, J., 2018. The Brazilian ‘‘riff-raff” society: Employment that brings human dignity. Contracorrente, Sao Paulo . Suárez-Eiroa, B., Fernández, E., Méndez-Martínez, G., Soto-Oñate, D., 2019. Operational principles of circular economy for sustainable development: linking theory and practice. J. Cleaner Prod. 214, 952–961 .M. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 224 Tirado-Soto, M.M., Zamberlan, F.L., 2013. Networks of recyclable material waste- picker’s cooperatives: an alternative for the solid waste management in the city of Rio de Janeiro. Waste Manage.  33 , 1004–1012 . UN-HABITAT, 2014. Solid waste management in the world’s cities: Water and sanitation in the world’s cities 2010. Routledge, London, New York. Varella, C.V.S., 2011. Turn-out the garbage bin: possibilities and limits of recycling as an alternative for waste treatment, Belo Horizonte.Velis, C., 2017. Waste pickers in Global South: Informal recycling sector in a circular economy era. Waste Manage. Res.: J. Int. Solid Wastes Public Cleansing Assoc., ISWA 35 , 329–331 . Welivita, I., Wattage, P., Gunawardena, P., 2015. Review of household solid waste charges for developing countries–A focus on quantity-based charge methods. Waste Manage.  46, 637–645 .M. Fuss, Raphael T.V. Barros and Witold-Roger Poganietz Waste Management 121  215–225 225 

