https://doi.org/10.1177/0734242X211029087Waste Management & Research 2021, Vol. 39 889 –891 © The Author 2021Article reuse guidelines:   sagepub.com/journals-permissions DOI: 10.1177/0734242X211029087 journals.sagepub.com/home/wmr Tourism industry is strongly connected with economic growth  and urban development especially in coastal areas. In particular, the total European Union  coastal holiday business was appraised at a Gross Value Added of €159 bln, that is, close to one-third of its total maritime economy, while the total employ- ment is almost 2.7 mln full-time equivalent jobs. In Europe alone,  with more than 500 mln arrivals per year, the tourism industry  represents nearly 12 mln direct jobs, within 2 mln enterprises,  with the direct turnover to be around €610 bln per year. On the  other hand, tourist development disturbs the metabolism of tour - ist areas mainly due to waste generation, use of local resources, and numerous elements of infrastructure that must be constructed  and operated, most commonly during the summer months, to  cover tourists’ needs. Unfortunately, existing data are scarce and mostly based on tourism industry as a whole, lacking a destina-tion-based focus at this point, that would highlight the adverse environmental effects imparted on specific tourism areas. Overall, besides the economic advantages, there is strong evi- dence that tourist activities also add significant pressures on the environment. Among them, waste generation is one of the most important, as it translates into a larger environmental footprint and  extreme environmental pressures, especially on coastal areas eco- systems, mainly in the form of pollution and subsequent loss of biodiversity, discouraging others from traveling to such impacted destinations. This is further intensified by over-tourism, a vital, clear, and present challenge in many locations around the globe, increasing massively the pressure on many ecosystems. As an example, if no actions are taken by the key tourism stakeholders soon enough, the weight of plastics that end up in our seas is esti-mated to be much higher than the weight of fish over the next decades. Furthermore, it is estimated that the global amount of  solid waste generated by tourism enterprises is more than 35 mil- lion tonnes annually. In general, tourists could produce up to twice  as much solid waste per capita as local populations and waste from accommodation has similar features to mixed household waste, being composed of a miscellaneous mix of materials, counting mainly organics  as well as hazardous  materials , that can create noteworthy  environmental impacts upon disposal  emissions and leaching of toxic materials). It is estimated that hotels create about 1 kg of unsorted waste per  guest per night. The major waste fractions produced by hotels are organic, plastics, glass cardboard, and paper, metals, green waste, and others. It is noted that organics originate mainly from food and beverage activities, for example preparing breakfast and meals for in-house restaurants. It should be noted, again, that des-tination-specific data and data from complete, thorough and inte-grated case studies are presently lacking. Nowadays, a circular economy  strategy along with the  United Nations  sustainable development goals   agenda, the EU Green Deal, and the United States of America   Green New Deal are gaining momentum as a means to combat climate change and contribute to environmental sustain-ability by tackling waste as a resource on a global scale. A new mindset to boost circular business models in the tourism indus-try seems to be a necessary step forward, to improve environ-mental performance, while at the same time generate cost  savings and growth of revenue and also help create new local  jobs. This step forward approach should be based on the adop-tion of Environmental Management Systems  principles as well as on the adoption of initiatives based on “R” strategies , where train-ing and inspiration of employees and customers are vital. Although this is already the case for some of the players involved, mostly large and luxury hotel brands, as already men- tioned there is not much-published data, especially in the form  of case studies and detailed assessments of stakeholder engage-ment to effectively achieve the environmental performance objectives. Moreover, this new step forward approach should be adopted across the entire tourism chain, along with a strong commitment from all stakeholders. In this effort, local compe-tent authorities should play a vital role in providing and promot-ing favorable measures for hotels with high environmental performance, such as tax breaks, reduction of administrative fees, extension of permits validity, reduction of financial guar - antees, green public procurement, credit access, and funding support. In general, if this regulatory relief will be implemented it will significantly help the tourism industry to adopt the targets set forth by CE, the EU Green Deal, the USA Green New Deal, and most importantly by the UN SDGs and the zero-waste approach (e.g. by reducing pollution and the presence of micro- plastics in coastal areas and beyond). Furthermore, it will help  increase hotels’ environmental performance and efficiency in their profitability by reducing resource consumption and making these destinations more attractive. Moreover, other soft activi-ties, such as the gamification of the environmental objectives by developing and using mobile phone applications, may attract engagement in the new waste management strategies that hotels and/or the tourist promotion industry apply. Steps forward to adopt a circular   economy strategy by the  tourism industry1029087 WMR 0010.1177/0734242X211029087Waste Management & ResearchEditorial editorial 2021 Editorial

890 Waste Management & Research 39 Reducing the volume of food wastes generated by the tourism  industry and their subsequent disposal in landfills is also crucial,  as the processing of 1 t of food waste can produce approximately 200 m 3 of biogas and emit approximately 0.35 t of CO2. Based on  current estimates, if food waste was a country, it would be the 3rd  largest emitter of GHGs with almost 4 bln t CO2 equivalent per  year. Managing tourism industry-generated food wastes  could make a vital contribution to climate change and pollution mitigation and pres-ervation of biodiversity. The implementation of waste manage- ment strategies (such as waste prevention, zero-waste approach,  upcycling etc.) based on real facts  in this new mindset poses a real challenge for the tourism industry, as tourism has over the last decades already substantially expanded. Equally importantly, following adoption of this approach, a carefully designed monitoring plan is essential to gradually improve per - formance through periodic adjustment to the approach as new  information becomes available. Circular economy in many countries, such as China, is encour - aged as a top-down national policy, while mostly in EU, USA, and  Japan, it is a tool to design bottom-up environmental and waste management strategies and/or policies. To adopt a CE strategy, whether a top-down or a bottom-up approach, a new international standard must be developed, promoted, and advertised the soonest possible, from a widely accepted organization, such as the International Standard Organization . This standard should  be efficient but also simple enough to be used by all kinds and  sizes of tourism organizations in any geographical area that aims at shifting from a linear to a CE model. All this, by increasing the effectiveness of the circular use of resources, while at the same time endorsing economic and social benefits and effectively engaging the entire stakeholder chain. Regarding this, the ISO has already established in 2018 a Technical Committee on CE. Moreover, the current use of ISO 14001, EMAS, Eco-label, Green-Key etc., should be mandated for all, while waiting for the new international standard to be developed and implemented. A shift to a CE business model involves more than the imple- mentation of new processes and activities, however. It also requires a new way of identifying value and cooperation within the value chain, and a corresponding change in organizational culture. Enterprises related to the tourism industry must realize that applying the CE framework and philosophy into their organi-zation can take time, however, the result will be a future of sus-tainability, security, and opportunity that they can in turn use to attain a better position in their respective field of engagement. The tourism industry in general has been relatively slow to  change with the times even though there is evidence that some hotels adopted eco-friendly approaches . Yet, in the face of ongoing and growing adverse effects from loss of biodiversity, pollution, climate change and other environmental pressures, it is imperative that tourism companies move to quickly improve  their sustainability performance and adopt effective CE strate- gies. They should display their achievements through sustaina-bility reports, considering at the same time tourist views and behaviors in the framework of waste management. Moreover, behavioral changes and public participation is key to a functional waste handling system in the tourism industry. It must also be noted that in order for the tourism sector to be able to adopt a CE framework, it has to focus on initiatives that will help to reduce natural resources consumption, instead of helping the continua- tion of existing “one way” consumption patterns. This cannot be  elaborated without interaction with other participants in the tour - ism industry and even beyond. A general approach of implanting CE in the tourism industry may include control of resources and waste through a total quality management system, which will combine all the well-known standards such as ISO 9001, any or all EMS, Corporate Social Responsibility, Health and Safety, the ISO 22000  principles) as well as the international standards focused on a CE model. Furthermore, this will include  a product and services control (e.g. reuse your towels, power cut- off timer for lights, dual waste bins in hotel rooms, no longer offering plastic straws, etc.) and new practices  that will be adopted from the tourists as well as the operators and owners. Tourist practices should go beyond the traditional cus-tomer role, as tourism can very well be a crucial testbed for new types of CE developments, such as demarketing, in order to dis-courage guests from certain purchases so as to reduce negative  impacts (e.g. hoteliers may charge any single used item if the  customer asked for it such as straws or could restrict the number of food varieties in buffet menus to avoid food waste). Similarly, decommodification of tourist practices by new forms of peer-to-peer accommodation, travel, etc. will help to achieve sustainabil-ity by collaborative consumption. This, while decreasing the influence of commodities and effectively limiting the effect of commercialization, as tourists and other relevant stakeholders rent or borrow goods and services rather than buying or owning them. An interesting approach through a gamification concept  that would interconnect websites  with the  environmental performance of any destination or tourist services  is on priority as customer rating prac-tices could help the tourist industry to adopt a CE strategy. Overall, the tourism industry has a vital role to play both in the  areas of economic growth and job development and, even more importantly, in sustainable resource management to minimize, if not eliminate, waste production and to improve overall environ-mental protection and sustainability. Hence, the evolution of the  industry toward a CE path in order to minimize its environmental  footprint is of paramount importance to all of us. In this respect, International Solid Waste Association  as a world-leading organization on the management of solid waste and its numerous dedicated and well-placed professionals, will be called upon to provide the necessary technical expertise, training, and informa-tion-innovation development, monitoring, exchange, and  Editorial 891 propagation for the effective adoption of a CE strategy by the  tourism industry. Also, taking into account the significant scien-tific knowledge gaps mainly in targeted and thorough case stud-ies, destination-specific data, and detailed assessments of stakeholder engagement to effectively achieve the environmental  performance objectives, researchers, practitioners, and regulators  are encouraged to publish their pertinent findings on tourism industry’s environmental management in WM&R.Declaration of conflicting interests  The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to  the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Funding The authors received no financial support for the research, author - ship, and/or publication of this article. Antonis A. Zorpas Open University of Cyprus, Faculty of  Pure and Applied Sciences, Lab of  Chemical Engineering and Engineering  Sustainability, Nicosia, Cyprus Emails: antonis.zorpas@ouc.ac.cy;   antoniszorpas@yahoo.com Jose Navarro-Pedreño Department of Agrochemistry and  Environment, University Miguel  Hernandez of Elche, Alicante, Spain Email: jonavar@umh.esIraklis Panagiotakis ENYDRON – Environmental Protection  Services,   Athens, Greece Email: panagiotakis@enydron.com Dimitris Dermatas National Technical University of Athens,   School of Civil Engineers,   Athens, Greece Email: dermatas@gmail.com



