265 © Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019  M.-L. Franco-García et al. , Towards Zero Waste , Greening of Industry  Networks Studies 6, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92931-6_13Chapter 13 The Future of Circular Economy and   Zero Waste María-Laura Franco-García, Jorge Carlos Carpio-Aguilar,  and Hans Bressers Abstract  This chapter provides a reflective analysis of the contributions focusing  on how the chapters contribute to circular economy in two main themes that will  define the future of circular economy research: challenges and opportunities and  effective collaboration with stakeholders. Lessons learned and commonalities are  also discussed to finally draw some conclusions and recommendations to further  elaborate the research agenda of this field. Keywords  Circular economy · Collaboration with stakeholders · Zero waste 13.1  Country-Specific Challenges and Opportunities One of the lessons from the chapters is that challenges and opportunities have been  so far somewhat generically described in the literature, which tends to assume a  universal view of challenges and opportunities, where the lessons from developed  countries can be without a problem translated to developing countries. We argue  that a more contingent approach is needed, taking into account deep structural,  institutional and cultural differences between countries. In other words, our under - standing of circular economy  challenges and opportunities needs to be geo - graphically and socially embedded to understand country-specific differences.  Accordingly, in Chap. 2, Dieleman and Martínez analysed opportunities and chal - lenges of CE in Mexico from a wide systemic perspective inspired by the concept  of national innovation systems and its emphasis on distinctiveness of contextual  conditions. To frame their discussion, they used the components of such concept,  i.e.  “market trends and conditions”;  “competitiveness and productivity”;   M.-L. Franco-García  · H. Bressers  University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands e-mail:  m.l.francogarcia@utwente.nl ; j.t.a.bressers@utwente.nl   J. C. Carpio-Aguilar  Walmart Mexico, CDMX, Mexico e-mail:  jorge.carpio@walmart.com 266 “the political and regulatory framework”;  “education, training and knowledge  transfer”; and  “learning culture”. As part of the opportunities,  the market  conditions and long-term market trends in the country are positive;  the regula - tory framework through the country’s National Development Plan aims at stimulat - ing green growth;  since the 1990s, environmental education nationally exists as  well as knowledge transfer systems;  Mexicans’ openness to new technology  induced practices. In contract, serious challenges are also mentioned:  markets  are not flexible, and there is lack of bank credits allocation in the long term;  a  culture that restricts innovation and creativity and a desire to shape and control the  future leaves Mexico with poor seizing opportunities;  discrepancy between  the creation and execution of policy and the environmental education plan is another  real challenge;  the needed rather experimental and learning-by-doing educa - tional approach to address CE shows limitations of the current Mexican learning  culture. The authors emphasised this last element because it influences how the  economy and society function and therefore represents one of the biggest chal - lenges to overcome. In particular within the waste sector, in Chap. 3, Ghinea and Gavrilescu analysed  the Romanian waste management policy framework and practices to identify chal - lenges and opportunities of CE goals. As a result, they suggested strategic solutions  for integrated waste management and policies for its improvement. With the help of  the life cycle assessment methodology, eight waste management scenarios were  assessed. The first one was used as baseline (collection, transportation and landfill - ing) for the comparison with seven hypothetical scenarios which are constructed  following the principles of Lansink’s ladder . As mentioned in Chap. 1,  Lansink’s ladder emphasises the relevance of preventing waste generation during its  management. The best scenario according to the environmental categories of the  LCA methodology was the scenario that integrates separate collection by waste  streams, recycling of those materials, composting of organic waste and incineration  of the residual waste. Seeking for possibilities to embed CE at the country level, Cruz-Pastrana and  Franco-García in Chap. 4 explored the feasibility to implement a cap-and-trade sys - tem  to mitigate climate change effects which has been widely applied in  other countries but not in Mexico. In such context, CE can offer additional possibili - ties to embrace C&TS generating both environmental and economic benefits. Hence  the purpose of this chapter was to explore the C&TS feasibility in Mexico and to  highlight the implications of considering CE models into a cap-and-trade instru - ment. Approaching this intention by using MACC ,  57% of all the measures to reduce GHG with negative cost agglomerates could  contribute almost 1% to the GDP by 2020. Based on MACC calculations, the chap - ter argued that C&TS is potentially feasible in Mexico, even further as the attached  carbon price by end-users might be a strong motivation to integrate CE tenets to  their operations, bringing new innovative opportunities to close materials’ and  energy loops. M.-L. Franco-García et al. 267 13.2  Stakeholders Moving forward, the rest of the papers in this volume were introduced by following  the stakeholder structure which was outlined in Chap. 1. We started with papers that  clearly showed the public sector as one of the most influential stakeholders, in par - ticular when it concerns the “household solid waste management” which is the  focus of Chaps. 5 and 6. In the case of Chap. 7, a governmental programme to  stimulate the urban symbiosis  implementation in China was the core of  the analysis, whilst in Chap. 8 the Indonesian higher education management was the  focus, education being one of the public sector’s responsibilities. Universities were  discussed as the intellectual cradle for the transition from linear to circular economy  trends. 13.2.1   Stakeholder Promoter: Public Sector It is not a coincidence that the authors  of Chap. 5 elaborated their  case under the stakeholder identity and salience framework for their analysis of the  household solid waste management in Cimahi City, Indonesia. In effect, the theory  of stakeholder identity and salience by Mitchell et al.  is the core analytical  tool applied to this Indonesian case that to some extent reflects the current situation  of the majority of cities in the country. Authors have a double interest whilst con - ducting this research; the first one is to approach systematically the identification  and classification of the stakeholders involved in the household solid waste manage - ment in Cimahi City and secondly to detect the specific stakeholders who would be  entitled to lead the transition towards circularity patterns of the solid waste manage - ment. Moreover, collaborative schemes for such transition can be discussed and  designed by engaging those salient stakeholders. As one of the main findings of this  research, it proved possible to identify and classify the stakeholders in Cimahi City  for the household waste management into two meaningful categories:  the formal  sector  and the  informal sector (not offi - cially registered waste collectors and recycling entities). Díaz and Tinoco-Castrejón presented in Chap. 6 the efforts of the government of  Cuautlancingo, Puebla, Mexico, to transit the urban solid waste management  towards circular economic practices. They interviewed governmental stakeholders  to diagnose the current practices that resemble those of CE and validated such infor - mation through either secondary information sources or interviewing other stake - holders who were to some extent directly involved in the waste management. Based  on the evidence, the authors showed that in spite of the municipal efforts to provide  proper waste collection and disposal services, the urban solid waste management in  Cuautlancingo is lagging behind when comparing it with what circular economy  promotes. There is a consensus among stakeholders that the more discharged mate - rials during production and post-consumption can be recycled within companies, a 13 The Future of Circular Economy and Zero Waste 268 higher productivity level of the municipality can be achieved because this means a  reduction of the materials to be treated or disposed by municipalities. The use of  indicators to boost circular economy practices is suggested, such as the resource  consumption rate , rates of segregated and recycled materials and rates  of waste used for energy recovery. Additionally, local government is recommended  to formulate regulations and policies in order to ensure the environmental care and  responsible acting of the citizens. This should be integrated with awareness cam - paigns about waste management opportunities for the community. Openness for  collaboration with other stakeholders was enthusiastically mentioned whilst talking  to governmental officers. Chapter 7, entitled “A Massive Urban Symbiosis: A Preliminary Review of the  Urban Mining Pilot Bases Initiative in China”, written by Xue et al. aims to bring  the Chinese urban mining pilot base  case under the light of the governance  assessment tool . The research question driving this work is  what are the typical features as a “massive urban symbiosis policy” that the Chinese  urban mining pilot base  programme represents and to what extent can they  be improved? The UMPB is a Chinese governmental initiative to stimulate recy - cling of key materials as the main urban symbiosis activity that links efficient mate - rial flows between production and consumption, the industry sector and the urban  sector. The urban symbiosis  is also in  China framed under the CE policy and has been embedded into China’s urban min - ing pilot base  programme that promotes the growth of the recycling indus - try and the use and development of advanced technology to cope with high-value  recycling practices. The current 45 pilot bases with a planned 6.6 billion tonnes per  year capacity indicates that a massive urban symbiosis effort is taking place in  China. Moreover, this paper shows that the driving force of waste recycling man - agement in China is moving from an environmental and recycling angle to resource  strategies. Despite UMPB’s legal and subsidies assurance, this does not reflect the  creation of a perfect governance context for its implementation. On the contrary,  some incoherencies and policy conflicts were detected at the multi-ministerial  cross-management network, who are the actual UMPB implementers. Those repre - sent some of the main barriers  for this programme. In Chap. 8, “Incorporating Circular Sustainability Principles in DKI Jakarta:  Lessons Learned from Dutch Business Schools Management”, Nurdiana et al. ana - lysed the experiences of the integration of circular economy into the Dutch high  education curricula with the purpose of using them as reference for the Indonesian  higher education system. The authors identified the need to expand the concept of  “green university” to the broader concept of CE. This is due to the important role  universities play in societies, forming capacities to face current and future societal  challenges, especially those oriented to cope with resource scarcity and pollution  effects. As part of the findings in Indonesia, it can be mentioned here that the  Indonesian universities have a relatively narrow view, whilst the Dutch cases anal - ysed present a more holistic approach towards sustainability and CE, offering them  some extra manoeuvre opportunities for the inclusion of CE education. M.-L. Franco-García et al. 269 13.2.2   Stakeholder Promoter: Private Sector The internationally operating supermarket chain Walmart in its Mexico operations  has identified food waste as a niche for improvement as described in Chap. 9, where  the concept of zero waste to landfill  was explored with the intention to  ameliorate the organic waste management. ZWTL pursues prevention and reduction  of wastes at their source of generation, which effects are in line with CE principles.  In fact, Rincón-Moreno et al. suggest that “circularity” would increase productivity  throughout the food supply chain if it became part of the business strategy. In order  to test this, a showcase was selected to explore how the organic waste management  can be improved by combining a CE business model and a ZWTL strategy. After  analysing the data of the organic composition of the wastes ,  the authors elaborated upon the idea that most of the food considered as waste can  be recovered through different stages. Even further, 40% of the food waste manage - ment costs can be saved through three business actions associated with those recov - ery stages. The proposed framework intends to collect all the sustainable concepts  that might potentially be resembled in other industries with similar challenges. The  findings showed that most of the food which is considered waste (discharged organic  products) can be recovered through different operations within the shop facilities:  inventory management, first expired-first out, donations, livestock feed and a biodi - gester to generate electricity. The biodigester represents the most important invest - ment, though 40% of the food waste management costs can be saved through three  of the business actions associated to those recovery stages. Through the conduction  of this project, a combined framework  is elaborated and  discussed. The PetStar PET bottle-to-bottle recycling system, a zero-waste circular econ - omy business model, was presented in Chap. 10. Cámara-Creixell and Scheel-   Mayenberger emphasised the point of finding ways to organise the PET bottles  post-consumption enabling PetStar to successfully contribute to the plastic recy - cling industry. Participation of three stakeholders involved in the industry  – the  environment, society and business – requires a different business model in which all  actors can participate and produce a more inclusive added value. This is mentioned  in reflection on the scavenger’s conditions as an important stakeholder in the PET  bottle recycling value chain. Scavengers mostly operate informally, resulting in  their exclusion from traditional business models. At this regard, “PetStar is a com - pany that has designed and implemented a Circular Economy business model for  PET bottles that is trying to achieve a dream for the recycling industry, i.e. to disen - gage the recycled bottle from virgin resources, avoiding the conversion of the pack - aging to waste, and operate a perennial cycle in the use of the packaging”. This case  disclosed how their business model is operated in a sustainable way: economically  feasible and competitive whilst environmentally resilient and socially oriented  towards the poorest and most informal sectors, the scavenger and collector com - munities. Even beyond their own market boundaries, there is a strong belief that  conditions can be created to enable replicability of their model of sustainable 13 The Future of Circular Economy and Zero Waste 270  recycling to other developing countries where the potential of zero-waste circular  value systems is well perceived by a large number of stakeholders in the PET bottle  value chain. In Chap. 11, the concepts of social life cycle assessment  and combined  social and environmental LCA  were explored through the application of  existing LCA methods to the global value chain of denim jeans. Franco-García et al.  reported on the SELCA method from this explorative research. The inclusion of the  social component into the assessment of the denim jeans’ showcase contributes to  the battery of impact assessment tools for products whose value chain scope is mul - tinational . Four scenarios for jeans assembly were compared; three of them  are defined under the circular economy  principles by including recycled mate - rials  during the yarn production. During the application  of the SELCA method, some new challenges were encountered related to inventory  analysis, in particular during data acquisition for social inventories. This last aspect  is mainly due to the extensive list of key stakeholders for the showcase and the  qualitative nature of the social metrics used. The list starts with cotton cultivators  from different countries where regulations and codes of conduct seem to have con - textualised interpretations and consequently different levels of implementation. In  this regard, governmental intervention to instrument the transition towards suitable  social/environmental performance along the global jeans value chain was also dis - cussed in this paper. 13.2.3   Stakeholder Promoter: Civil Society Plasencia-Vélez et  al. presented Chap. 12 “A Circular Model of Residential  Composting in Mexico State”. This is the description of a composting project led by  a civil society group within the physical borders of a residential unit nearby Mexico  City. They produce compost from their own organic wastes, closing the loop by  creating a product that nourish inner gardens of their residential area. The authors  provided an in-depth description of their case arguing that their research contributes  to the CE studies, in particular addressing the participation of households and, by  this, showing that CE practices can be promoted by anyone who perceives the  potential of discharged materials to be reintegrated into the natural biological cycle.  The Mexican urban solid waste  has a high organic component   that can be potentially recovered and transformed as the households of Club de Golf  Bellavista showed in this research. For the authors, this is a grass-roots example  with positive effects on the USW management. Hence, with the intention to deploy  its potential at a larger scale, the purpose of this research was to identify the neces - sary conditions for this type of projects to be successful. Therefore, it is important  to identify and analyse similar cases, in order to learn from the existing best prac - tices. Looking beyond the borders, British and Dutch cases are also analysed  through an analytical framework constructed from specialised literature. It is used  to assess the case in Mexico State by the means of surveys and semi-structured  M.-L. Franco-García et al. 271 interviews. Among the most relevant findings, “social participation” came consis - tently across as a relevant success factor in this type of grass-roots initiatives.  Additionally, promoters of this case gave suggestions about ways to engage the  other neighbours in the separation phase of USW. 13.3  Concluding Overview and Suggestions for Future  Research The Ellen MacArthur Foundation , SUN and McKinsey have estimated that  “by adopting Circular Economy principles, Europe can create a net benefit of €1.8  trillion by 2030, or €0.9 trillion more than in the current linear development path”.  Certainly, it is much easier to calculate monetary benefits than to implement the  necessary instruments to transit to a more circular economy through the current  complexity of value chains. The transition needs to involve product designers, busi - ness developers, investors, marketers, managers, consumers and every single person  of the society who has to deal with any type of discharged resources  and can  still see its value as a resource. More importantly, stakeholders are needed to bring  the resources back to any of the closed material  loops to avoid landfill - ing to its maximum expression . This implies full systemic change and  innovation at different levels: technological, organisational, social, financial and  policy level. It is though expected that even in a highly CE scenario, there will  remain some elements of linearity as virgin resources are required and ultimate  residual materials are disposed of. Some technological challenges stem from the  current waste treatment facilities, such as incinerators that do not fit within the CE  principles. To deal with that some countries, e.g. the Netherlands, have considered  a midterm plan to gradually transform low-efficient incinerators into specialised  recycling and reuse facilities. Also relevant is the growing movement of critical think-tanks to further develop  new paradigms to practise the CE tenets. The number of approaches and business  models to be considered grows constantly due to the sense of urgency produced by  the foreseen beneficial potential of CE. Cramer , for instance, has reported  nine circularity schemes which at the same time imply the integration of related  business models. Here is the list of her 9Rs:  refuse, prevent the use of resources;   reduce, decrease the use of resources;  reuse, find new product use (second  hand);  repair, maintain and repair;  refurbish, improve product;  remanu - facture, create new products from second hand;  repurpose, reuse product for  different purposes;  recycle, reuse raw materials of product; and  recover,  recover energy from waste. Historically, the practice of the 9Rs has been observed at a small and individual  scale, but the real challenge is to scale them up into collaborative platforms where  resource flows create value and close the production loops into a zero-waste system.  The businesses that have invested in innovations like new material recovery  methods 13 The Future of Circular Economy and Zero Waste 272 and material substitution are expected to play a leading role on this because they  have an influential position within their networks and stakeholders. On the other  hand, the efforts of the private sector require the support of policy instruments and  the consumer participation, as it was repeatedly mentioned in the cases here  presented. To sum up, the following reported barriers can be turned into the focus of further  research along the ongoing CE implementation:  institutional barriers posed by  existing business models,  organisational barriers as a result of poorly coordi - nated efforts,  legal barriers hampering innovation to some extent,  economic  barriers that focus on current business models,  behavioural barriers to change  consumers’ attitudes,  environmental commitments associated to local and inter - national agreements and  technological barriers that prevent incremental  innovations. With no doubt, technological innovations are a must in the transition towards CE,  but it can also be argued that innovation is not always the panacea when the end-of-   life of some materials represents a barrier by itself or not all the materials might be  improved or substituted. Hence, in some cases, producers have to compromise the  toxicity level of some ingredients in the formulation of their products, simply  because they cannot sacrifice the product quality. In other cases, producers have  important suppliers who cannot be replaced or do not agree to provide information  on their materials. A way to overcome the reluctance to open up the flux of informa - tion could be by a suitable policy mix that regulates the transparency of information  and/or stimulates purchasing circular products. In regard to the local and international environmental agreements, e.g. green - house emission reduction , CE is foreseen as a contributor to achieve  the Paris’ targets by including, for instance, a CO 2 tax per product which could  result in a more realistic price of products and simultaneously have impact on  Sustainable Development Goal 12 . In  reality, a plethora of environmental costs are not yet internalised in the product  price, so this can be an opportunity to also reduce the prices of some products when  they proved to be produced under any  of the 9R   frameworks. The CE and ZW nexus deploys, as it was here above briefly discussed, a large  number of current and future research opportunities. The chapters compiling this  book have tried to illustrate such potential, but we, as editors, have to admit that the  CE topic is such a prolific and dynamic field that results, currently, impossible to  completely describe it. In other words, this book aims to be a piece of “work in  progress” that connects two relevant topics to transform wastes into resources: CE  and ZW. M.-L. Franco-García et al. 273 References Bressers H, Bressers N, Kuks S, Larrue C  The governance assessment tool and its use.  In: Bressers H, Bressers N, Larrue C  Governance for drought resilience: land and water  drought management in Europe. Springer International Publishing, Cham Cramer J  Milieu. Elementaire Deeltjes: 16. Amsterdam University Press B.V , Amsterdam Ellen MacArthur Foundation  Towards a circular economy. Ellen MacArthur Foundation,  Brussels Lansink A, de Vries H  – in ‘t Veld, De Kracht van de Kringloop; Geschiedenis en Toekomst  van de Ladder van Lansink (The power of closing the loop; history and future of the ladder of  Lansink). Vrilan, Apeldoorn Mitchell RK, Agle BR, Wood DJ  Toward a theory of stakeholder identification and salience:  defining the principle of who and what really counts. Acad Manag Rev 22:853–88613 The Future of Circular Economy and Zero Waste 

