Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rrso20 Rural Society ISSN: 1037-1656  2204-0536  Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rrso20 Circular agri-food approaches: will consumers buy novel products made from vegetable waste? Breda McCarthy, Ariadne Beatrice Kapetanaki & Pengji Wang To cite this article:  Breda McCarthy, Ariadne Beatrice Kapetanaki & Pengji Wang  Circular agri-food approaches: will consumers buy novel products made from vegetable waste?, Rural Society, 28:2, 91-107, DOI: 10.1080/10371656.2019.1656394 To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10371656.2019.1656394 Published online: 05 Sep 2019. Submit your article to this journal  Article views: 18 View related articles  View Crossmark data

Circular agri-food approaches: will consumers buy novel products made from vegetable waste? Breda McCarthya, Ariadne Beatrice Kapetanakib*and Pengji Wangc aDepartment of Economics and Marketing, James Cook University, Townsville, Australia;bHertfordshire Business School, University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK;cBusiness Academic Group, James Cook University, Singapore ABSTRACT This article discusses the challenges associated with managing waste in the horticultural sector by presenting the circulareconomy framework as a solution to the problem of food waste. The research focuses on consumers ’role and value adding as one strategy that transforms food waste for reuse in accordance with a circular economy. A structured questionnaire was collected from a sample  of Australian households to assess consumers ’ willingness buy food derived from underutilised biomass. Thesurvey found half of the sample was willing to buy value-added food. Helping Australian farmers was the top-ranking factordriving demand. Awareness of the food waste problem is signi ﬁcant in distinguishing consumers who are willing to buy value-added food from those who are not. Marketingrecommendations for communication design a circular economy are to stress empathy and care for farmers and highlight theconsequences of food waste for both the natural environment and people.KEYWORDS Consumer attitudes; circular economy; food waste; valued-added food Introduction International momentum to curb food loss and waste is growing, with governments and businesses making commitments to address an issue which has signi ﬁcant ethical, economic, and environmental rami ﬁcations for a global society . If food loss and waste were its own country, it would be the third largest greenhouse gas emitter after theUnited States and China . At the same time, the world ’s population is forecasted to reach 9.6 billion people by 2050 and sustainably feeding agrowing population demands urgent solutions to the food waste problem (World Resources Institute, 2013). Since the Industrial Revolution, economies have followed a model of “take- make-use-dispose ”which is called the “linear economy ”. The linear economy results in products becoming waste at the end of their life . Many scho- lars  have discussed the linear economy ’s lack of sustainability and propose alternative concepts that follow nature ’s life cycles, termed the “circular economy ”. The circular economy approach is one © 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT Breda McCarthy breda.mccarthy@jcu.edu.au *Present address: The York Management School, University of York, York, UKRURAL SOCIETY 2019, VOL. 28, NO. 2, 91 –107 https://doi.org/10.1080/10371656.2019.1656394 response to the problem of food waste and loss. The circular economy represents a closed- loop system in which resources are kept in a loop of production and continuous usage, allowing precious and ﬁnite resources to generate more value for a longer period (McDo- nough & Braungart, 2002). The circular economy involves reuse, repair, refurbishing, and recycling of existing materials and products and what was earlier considered to be wastebecomes a resource . In this research, we focus on one circular economy approach, namely value-adding, to deal with the food waste problem in the Australian horticulture industry. In Australia, the horticulture industry is grappling with the food waste challenge, along with climate change Figure 1. Strategies to move Australian horticulture towards a circular economy. Source: Adapted from Potting, Hekkert, Worrell, and Hanemaaijer  and the National Food Waste Strategy . Image: Government of the Netherlands ( https://www.government.nl/topics/circular-economy/from-a-linear- to-a-circular-economy ).92 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. . Approximately one quarter of all veg- etables produced do not leave the farm , representing a highly ine ﬃcient use of resources given that food can be conceptualised as embedded water and energy . The horticulture industry is a substantial sector of the economy, generating exports worth $2.1 billion (Australian Government, 2016 ). The agri-food supply chain plays an important socio-economic role in Australia  generally and rural economies speci ﬁcally. In 2012 –2013, approximately 56,700 people were employed in Australia to grow fruit, vegetables, andnuts for the domestic and export markets  and the bulk of this industry is located in regional, and sometimes very remote, places in Australia . Numerous authors highlight waste and ineﬃciencies in the agri-food supply chain and call for more cooperation amongst stake- holders (Göbel, Langen, Blumenthal, Teitscheid, & Ritter, 2015 ; Mena, Terry, Williams, & Ellram, 2014 ) as well as circular economy approaches (Ingrao, Faccilongo, Di Gioia, & Messineo, 2018 ; Pagotto & Halog, 2016 ; Secondi, Principato, Ruini, & Guidi, 2019 )t o enhance sustainable food production systems. Göbel et al.  call for “… regional initiative and model projects for innovative waste management, focused on there-use of waste and the development of supporting services. ” Managing waste in an innovative way is a key factor to more sustainable rural commu- nities  and also enhances farmers ’proﬁts (Chen, Rojas-Downing, Zhong, Sa ﬀron, & Liao, 2015 ). It is argued that tackling food waste and loss would lead to“important opportunities for local economies and stakeholders ”(Secondi et al., 2019 , p. 10) and “value chain innovation, such as converting horticulture waste into fresh veg- etable juices and natural food colors ”(Kouwenhoven, Reddy Nalla, & Lossonczy von Losoncz, 2012 , p. 132). Curbing food loss may help rural and regional economies and ensure the agri-food sector continues to play a role in the prosperity of people living inrural and regional Australia. One solution to the food waste generated by the Australianhorticulture industry is value-adding. Value-adding involves turning fruit and vegetable residues into high value products  and is one example of the reuse of materials that illustrates circular economy principles . In food markets, consumers are the ﬁnal users. Hence, it is imperative to understand to what extent a circular economy solution to the food waste issue (i.e. novel, value-added food made from food waste) is appealing to food consumers. Studies on the consumer ’s perspective of a circular economy are lacking , with scholars stating, “little is known about consumers ’willingness to participate in a circular economy ”(Borrello, Caracciolo, Lombardi, Pascucci, & Cembalo, 2017 , p. 1). In the area of value-added food derived from food waste, most existing research is located in the food science discipline and describes restricted examples and pilot-scale laboratory experiences . With regard to the consumer ’s perspec- tive, scholars note consumers are averse to novel, food-related technologies for manyreasons, including risk aversion and perceptions of “unnaturalness ”(Lusk, Roosen, & Bie- berstein, 2014 ). Branded products derived from food waste are limited and commerciali- sation  ischallenging . The present article, by focusing on Australian consumers ’ attitudes towards novel, value-added products, aims to ﬁll a gap in the literature and also has practical implications for growers and other value chain members.RURAL SOCIETY 93 Literature review & theory Fruit and vegetables are the second largest commodity contributing to food loss around the world. Food is lost during, or immediately after, harvesting on the farm for several reasons. These include fruit that is bruised, eaten by pests, does not meet the rigid quality standards set by retailers, or is dumped due to over-supply in the marketplace. The two major sources of surplus food and food waste at the farm are overproduction and non-compliance with market standards in terms of size,shape, or appearance . In Australia, the power of supermarkets to enforce “quality standards ”is a source of frustration for farmers . It is estimated that 25% of all vegetables pro- duced in Australia do not leave the farm and the total cost of agricultural food loss tofarmers is $2.84 billion . The scale of this loss makes waste reduction, at the pre-and post-harvest stages, an important policy goal, as outlined in the Food Waste Strategy . The vision of a circular economy is gaining traction in academic and practitioner- oriented literatures. There is, however, no commonly accepted de ﬁnition of a circular economy  and scholars have identi ﬁed 114 de ﬁnitions . The concept of a circular economy, in general terms, promotes resource minimisation  and is most frequently depicted as a combination of reduce, reuse and recycle activities (EU Commission, 2014 ;K i r c h h e r re ta l . , 2017;M a r t i n&S c h o u t e n , 2012 ;W o źniak & Pactwa, 2018 ), which help turn a linear system into a circular system. In a linear economic model, the physical environment is treated as a receptacle for waste products from the economy and design for disassembly, recycling, and reuse are not fundamental partsof the system. This is ine ﬃcient since resources  ﬂow out of the system. A circular economy, on the other hand, is an industrial system that is restorative or regenerative by intention and design. It is founded on the principleof the earth as a closed economic system, where the environment and economy arelinked in a circular relationship. The circular nature refers to materials ﬂowing within a closed-loop which are to be reused again and again . Scholars in the circular economy ﬁeld often draw upon the waste hierarchy fra- mework  and it is agreed that the most impor- tant step in the approach to waste management is waste prevention . This research adopts the following deﬁnition of a circular economy: A circular economy describes an economic system that is based on business models which replace the ‘end-of-life ’concept with reducing, alternatively reusing, recycling and recovering materials in production/distribution and consumption processes, thus operating at the microlevel , meso level  and macro level, with the aim to accomplish sustainable development,which implies creating environmental quality, economic prosperity and social equity, tothe bene ﬁt of current and future generations.  Figure 1 oﬀers examples of how a linear horticultural sector can be turned into a circular system and outlines key strategies. For instance, commodities such as fruit and vegetables are grown, consumed, composted, and returned to the earth to enrich the soil.94 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. Commodities can also be used to make processed food and the materials  or waste  can be recycled and returned to the producer or processor and used as inputs in the food industry or another industry. Currently, Australian horticulture is struggling with food loss and food waste. In general, the term “food loss ”refers to food lost in the primary production and processing stages of the value chain and food waste refers to food lost at the retailer, catering, andhousehold levels . The use of food waste should follow waste hierarchy principles with waste prevention (Papargyropoulou et al., 2014 ), such as consumer education campaigns and donations to charity being the pre- ferred options. Evaluating the relative merits of waste management alternatives, however, is a complex task . Life cycle analysis shows that some actions  shouldalways be prioritised since they avoid a high environmental impact at a low cost . Food that is edible, but deemed of lower quality in terms of aesthetics, can be sold through local farmers ’markets, and there is a rich literature on the beneﬁ ts of alterna- tive food networks to society . Despite rigid food product standards in mainstream channels, one major Australian retailer, Woolworths, sells some freshproduce at a discount price under the “Odd Bunch ”campaign (Calvo-Porral, Medín, & Losada-López, 2017 ). Food waste can be lightly processed, such as chopped and packaged salads or mixed vegetables, or undergo traditional food processing techniques . These strategies have limitations, however, since the horticultural sector must compete directly with both processed and fresh imports from countries with very low labour rates, which is a challenge in Australia . Value adding in commodity value chains is increasingly being adopted by growers in reaction to globalisation pressures . Excess produce can be converted into highly processed products, such as baby food, juices, jams, fermented foods, pickles, sauces, soups, and so forth. In Australia,there is growing interest in waste valorisation practices based on innovative, plant-based products. For example, Natural Evolution Foods is a company that transforms organically grown, green bananas into gluten-free banana ﬂour and starch-resistant dietary ﬁbre (Aus- tralian Government, 2017 ). It is possible to convert food waste into energy, although it is not the most sustainable or cost-e ﬀective option for dealing with food waste. Problems relate to the capacity of treatment infrastructure and di ﬃculty in separating food waste from other waste streams . Sundrop Farms in South Australia is an example of an innovative, “circular ”food producer that grows toma- toes in greenhouses by using solar power, electricity generation, fresh water production, andhydroponics . Another solution to the food waste problem is to divert it to animal feed. Food waste can be turned into compost which helps “close the loop ”in a circular economy  and products, such as a liquid to enrich soil health, oﬀer an Australian manufacturing example . Value-adding refers to the process of increasing the value of inputs through transform- ation, for instance by using manufacturing processes or di ﬀerentiated production tech- niques, such as organic production . For instance, citrus peel can be used as a natural sweetener  in processed foods, and pectin can be utilisedas a gelling agent by the confectionary sector. In recent times, there has been a move towards “redesign ”of commodity products by extracting nutrients from biomass. TheRURAL SOCIETY 95 shift towards converting food waste into high-value products is driven by several factors. These include advanced technologies, consumer interest in health, and the sophisticated marketing of functional foods and neutraceuticals by cosmetic and pharmaceutical indus-tries .“Nutraceutical ”is a term derived from the words “nutrition ”and “pharmaceutical ”and can refer to any substance that is a food, or a part of a food, and provides medical or health bene ﬁts, including the prevention and treatment of diseases . Examples include ﬁsh oils or olive leaf extract. Likewise, “functional foods ”refer to foods that may provide health bene ﬁts beyond basic nutrition, such as pro- biotic drinking yogurt . Food waste is a source of valuable compounds for the pharmaceutical and nutraceutical industries. For instance,bromelain is an enzyme found in pineapple juice and in the stem of the pineapple and can be used to treat medical ailments (Galanakis, 2012 ; Laufenberg, Kunz, & Nystroem, 2003 ; Lin et al., 2013 ; Mirabella et al., 2014 ). The fresh cut fruit industry discards large percentages of by-products, such as peels, seeds, and unused ﬂesh, that can present similar or even higher contents of bioactive compounds, such as phenolic compounds, carotenoids, and vitamins, than the ﬁnal product . Options for waste management in the Australian horticultural sector are a mix of linear and circular economies. Many challenges to reducing food loss exist, including the current nature of food production, with its inherent risks (such as perishability, bad weather, disease, and declined market price), as well as deeply embedded social habits and insti-tutional practices . Australian growers speciﬁ cally cite barriers in the form of added expenses and lack of time, knowledge, and/or markets, to sell value-added products . This research focuses on one strategy presented in Figure 1 : re-thinking, re-processing, redesign (using parts, or all, of a dis- carded product in a new, improved product). A study by the Commonwealth Scienti ﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation  shows valuable food ingredients andsnack products can be produced using vegetables, which are dried and ground to apowder, with minimal loss of nutrients .“Extrusion ”(i.e. mixing, cooking, shearing, pu ﬃng, shaping, and drying) is a process designed to produce a wide variety of foods in sectors such as snacks, ready-to-eat  cereals, biscuits, confection-ery, and extruded crisp breads. Presently, however, the technology is restricted to two types of biomass –whole carrots and broccoli . Market reports also high- light the trend towards health and wellness, along with convenience, in the food and bev- erages industry, with companies using di ﬀerent strategies to address such trends that include more plant-based ingredients in high growth sectors  and provision of premium priced, value-added food productswith signi ﬁcant health claims . Turning fruit and vegetable residues into higher value products allows growers to capture more valuein the supply chain. Potential bene ﬁts are increased competitiveness by generating additional pro ﬁts and reducing disposal costs , better health outcomes, an increase in the overall quantity of vegetables eaten by Australians, pollution prevention, conservation of scarce resources such as energy, water, labour, land, and agrochemicals, , and patenting and licensing opportunities. Critics of a circular economy argue the social dimension (inherent in sustainable devel- opment thinking) is absent  and that, furthermore, the role of consu- mers as enablers of a circular economy is not outlined (Chamberlin & Boks, 2018 ;96 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. Kirchherr et al., 2017 ). Chamberlin and Boks  recently addressed this limitation by examining how businesses providing circular products or services use communications to market their o ﬀerings and in ﬂuence consumer behaviour. This article focuses on consu- mers ’role in purchasing “circular products ”and moving the horticultural sector towards a circular economy. To understand reasons for buying a value-added product, the norm-activation model  is utilised. This model posits that awareness of consequences  is one factor, amongst others, that in ﬂuences pro- social or environmental behaviour. Speci ﬁcally, it refers to whether someone is aware of the negative consequences for others, or for other things one values, when not acting pro-socially . Food waste is regarded as a moral problem given the inequality of access to food across the globe (Aschemann-Witzel, Jensen, Jensen, & Kuli- kovskaja, 2017 ;N eﬀ, Spiker, & Truant, 2015 ) and the rising problem of food security . There is ample evidence that consumers feel guilty, uncomfortable, or bothered, to some extent, if they waste food (Brook Lyndhurst,2007 ; Hamilton, Denniss, & Baker, 2005 ; Parizeau, von Massow, & Martin, 2015 ; Setti, Falasconi, Segrè, Cusano, & Vittuari, 2016 ; Stefan, van Herpen, Tudoran, & Lähteenmäki, 2013 ; Watson & Meah, 2012 ) and several scholars link food waste avoidance to moral jud- gements (Bortoleto, Kurisu, & Hanaki, 2012 ; Gjerris & Gaiani, 2013 ; Stancu, Haugaard, & Lähteenmäki, 2016 ). Hence, based on the existing research and conceptual model reviewed, the following hypothesis is proposed: H1:People who are willing to buy value added foods show more awareness of the food waste problem than those who are not willing to buy value-added foods. Methods Research instrument Data was collected using a questionnaire which contained measures of willingness to buy value-added foods, awareness of the food waste problem, motives for buying value-added foods, as well as demographic information, such as age, education, gender, and income level. The concept of value-added foods was sourced from food scientists after attendingworkshops on food waste organised by the CSIRO. The CSIRO team aims to create healthyfood ingredients and products from edible biomass left in the ﬁeld, lost biomass after harvest, or from side-streams of food processing . This represents a circu- lar economy approach to reduce food waste  and a move away from a linear economy approach of disposing food waste. Three types of value-added food made from fruit and vegetable waste were ident- iﬁed (a vegetable powder made from 100% whole carrot that can be used as a healthy ingredient for smoothies, dips, sauces, etc., an “on-the-go ”vegetable snack product made from 20% broccoli, and a fermented product based on vegetables that is rich innutrients and ﬁbre and can be used in products such as baby food, dips, and smoothies. To understand consumers ’willingness to buy value-added food, we asked the question, Are you willing to buy any one of the following products that can be made from fruitand vegetable waste? Consumers then indicated their willingness to buy, which was measured for each of the three types of value-added products using a seven point scale,anchored from extremely unwilling  to extremely willing .RURAL SOCIETY 97 We measured general awareness of the food waste problem using six items taken from a scale developed by Delley and Brunner . Some of these items were previously used by Stefan et al.  and Gjerris and Gaiani . The measure included three components: awareness of the social, environmental, and ﬁnancial consequences of food waste. Perceived food scarcity and a general awareness of the intrinsic value of food, which is linked to the natural environment, and an item that measured attribution of responsibility for the food waste problem were included. Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement ordisagreement with given statements that also used a seven point scale, anchored from very strongly disagree  to very strongly agree . The six scale items were: Food waste is a big environmental issue; In my country, households are responsible for a great proportion of the food waste ;Food waste is an important social issue  ;Foods are scarce over the world and should be consumed consciously ;Foods are gifts of nature and have to be treated as such ; and In my country, the food waste generated by households has great ﬁnancial consequences . The six item scale had a Cronbach ’s alpha of .853 , con ﬁ- rming the reliability of the scale. We also measured perceived consumer e ﬀectiveness in curbing food waste with one item I believe that every little e ﬀort by consumers helps to reduce the food waste problem using a seven point scale . Lastly, consu- mers ’motives for buying value-added food were assessed by respondents ranking six factors that would in ﬂuence their demand for value-added food. The six factors considered consumer demand for health and price, but also e ﬀects on humans versus e ﬀects on the environment. These items have been used in prior research relating to sustainability,notably clean energy . Sampling and recruitment Ethics approval was secured from the Human Ethics Committee in the ﬁrst author ’s uni- versity . A pre-test of the questionnaire was undertaken with the help of students and three marketing scholars, highly experienced in consumer behaviour, who reviewedthe research instrument. The target population were food shoppers who had responsibility for food shopping, cooking, or waste disposal. An online panel provided by Qualtrics Data Service was utilised to recruit respondents given the use of panels is becoming increasinglycommon in food waste studies (Birau & Faure, 2018 ; de Hooge et al., 2017 ; Ilyuk, 2018 ; Mallinson, Russell, & Barker, 2016 ; Stancu et al., 2016 ). We employed a quota sampling method to ensure the distribution of gender and age was aligned with the population ofAustralian food shoppers. An incentive  was used toencourage research participation. To reduce social desirability biases (van de Mortel, 2008 ), an online questionnaire and a guarantee of anonymity were used to counteract inclinations to o ﬀer“socially correct ”answers. Data was collected from April 2018 to May 2018 and a total of 330 usable questionnaires were obtained. Findings Summary statistics Of the 330 respondents, more women  than men participated in the survey. Income levels were diverse, with an estimated 13.9% having a total household income98 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. of less than $20,000 and 15.7% earning between $100,000 and $200,000. Data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics  shows the average annual gross household income was $109,668 in 2015 –2016 before tax and Medicare levies. Hence, our sample captured the low and average income earners, but also some of the high-income earners. The sample was well educated, with 21.5% reporting a Bachelor ’s degree as their highest level of education, in contrast with approximately 17% of Australia ’s popu- lation having a Bachelor degree . The most common  age category was 30–39, a quarter of the sample  was in full-time employment, 3 persons was the mean household size and close to half of the sample  had young children, agedunder 12, in the household . Willingness to buy value-added foods Respondents showed moderate willingness to buy three types of value-added food pro- ducts made from food waste. Most  were willing to buy vegetable snack products, Table 1. Respondents ’demographic proﬁ le. Data values % of Sample Age ≤20 years 2.42 21–29 22.12 30–39 26.97 40–49 14.55 50–59 10 ≥60 over 23.94 Employment status Full-time 25.76 Part-time 23.33 Seeking work 5.45 Retired 19.09 Home duties 18.79 Student 5.45 Other 2.12 Education No quali ﬁcation 2.73 Year 10 or 12 certi ﬁcate 33.64 Trade certi ﬁcate/vocational 8.48 Certiﬁcate 14.85 Diploma 11.21 Bachelor ’s degree 21.52 Post-graduate degree 7.58 Household size  1 7.58 2 13.33 3 31.82 4 21.52 5 7.58 6 4.24 Children in household 0 56.36 1 19.7 2 17.88 3 3.64 4 1.82 ≥5 0.6 Household income ≤$19,999 13.94 $20,000 –39,999 18.49 $40,000 –59,999 18.78 $60,000 –79,999 15.46 $80,000 –99,999 16.06 $100k –$199,999 15.76 ≥$200,000 1.52RURAL SOCIETY 99 46.9% the vegetable powder and 44.2% the fermented product. Over a quarter were “neither willing nor unwilling ”to buy the value added food products based on food waste  as Table 2 details. Factors in ﬂuencing demand for value-added foods Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for the question, What factors are most important in inﬂuencing your decision to buy a new food product that uses fruit or vegetable waste as a raw material? “Helping farmers/growers to prevent food waste ”was perceived as more important than all other factors, with 62% ranking this in their top two preferences. “Positive eﬀects on the natural environment ” and “eﬀects on the economy ” were of second-most importance while, “meeting the needs of the price-conscious consumer ” received the lowest importance  across the top two preferences. Findings forfactors in ﬂuencing the demand for value-added foods were obtained by comparing those willing and unwilling to buy a value-added snack food product. “Willingness to buy”was recoded into two groups, “willing ” and “unwilling or neutral ”. Results appear in Tables 4 and5. Comparing the two groups, “helping farmers/growers to prevent food waste ”was selected by both as the most important factor in ﬂuencing demand. Although many con- sumers knew value-added food is a solution to farmers ’food waste issues, they did not necessarily show a willingness to buy value-added food. In contrast to those unwilling to buy value-added food, more in the “willing ”group selected “meeting consumer demand for healthy food ”and“positive e ﬀects on the natural environment.” Cognitive factors in willingness to buy value added foods T-tests were performed to explore di ﬀerences between those “willing ” and “neutral or unwilling ”to  buy a value-added snack food product. The “willing ”group had higher awareness of food waste consequences, general awareness of the intrinsic value of food as a scarce natural resource, believed households are responsible for food waste andbelieved preventing food waste depends on individual actions . Discussion & conclusions Due to the scale of the food waste problem, there is an urgent need to move towards a circular economy. A circular economy model deals mainly with materials and resources. Incorporating the consumer perspective into a circular economy model pro-vides essential knowledge for decision-makers. This article presented ﬁndings from a questionnaire undertaken to examine the willingness of Australian consumers to buyfood made from underutilised biomass. Results illustrated there are signi ﬁcant di ﬀer- ences in attitudes between those who are willing to buy value-added foods and those who are neutral or unwilling. Empathy and care for farmers ’welfare was a purchasing criterion. By synthesising examples of “circular ”activities, products, and companies in the horticultural sector, potential bene ﬁts for regional and rural Australia were outlined. Unlike other studies on the circular economy, which tend to focus on industrial100 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. Table 2. Willingness to buy value-added foods derived from food waste by percentage . Item Sample mean Standard deviation Extremely unwilling Not at all willing Unwilling Neither willing nor unwilling Willing Very willing Extremely willing Vegetable powder 4.22 1.484 7.3 7.6 9.1 29.1 30.9  11.2 4.8  Vegetable snack 4.37 1.460 6.1 5.2 10.6 26.7 33.9  10.3 7.3  Fermented product 4.11 1.460 8.5 6.1 12.1 29.1 30.9 10 3.3 RURAL SOCIETY 101 processes and activities, such as design for disassembly and recycling, this research focused on the consumer perspective, contributing to the small, but growing, literature advocating a more nuanced perspective on the circular economy . Ranking factor1 2345 6 %% % % % %  Helping farmers/growers prevent food waste 37.9  24.1  12  8.6  5.5  6.9 Eﬀects on economy 10.7  23.7  18.2  21.3  16.8  8.9  Meeting consumer demand for healthy food 11.7  12  15.8  21.3  23  16.2  Positive e ﬀects on natural environment 19.6  16.5  21.6  16.2  15.8  10.3  Helping society 7.9  14.8  20.3  19.9  21.3  15.8  Meeting needs of price-conscious consumer 11.7  7.2  11.3  11.3  17.2  40.5  Scale: 1 = ﬁrst factor to 6 = last factor in ﬂuencing decision to buy value-added foods Table 4. Factors in ﬂuencing those “willing to buy ”value-added foods . Factor123456 %% % % % %  Helping farmers/growers prevent food waste 41%  26%  12%  10%  6%  5%  Eﬀects on economy 11%  23%  20%  20%  16%  9%  Meeting consumer demand for healthy food 13%  12%  15%  21%  24%  15% Positive e ﬀects on the natural environment 22%  15%  22%  17%  15%  9%  Helping society 7%  16%  20%  20%  19%  17%  Meeting needs of price-conscious consumer 11%  7%  11%  10%  18%  4%  Table 5. Factors in ﬂuencing those unwilling to buy value-added foods . Factor123456 %% % % % %  Helping farmers/growers prevent food waste 48%  18%  11%  5%  5%  13% Eﬀects on economy 10%  25%  14%  24%  18%  9%  Meeting consumer demand for healthy food 7%  13%  19%  21%  20%  19% Positive e ﬀects on natural environment 13%  21%  21%  14%  18%  13%  Helping society 9%  10%  21%  19%  28%  13%  Meeting needs of price-conscious consumer 13%  9%  13%  15%  14%  35% Table 6. Group attitudes towards food waste and willingness to buy a value-added snack food. Full sampleGroup 1 mean willingGroup 2 mean neutral /unwillingSig.( t- test) Awareness of the consequences of food wasteFood waste is a big environmental issue 5.17 5.39 4.94 .000 Food waste is an important social issue (e.g. world hunger).5.36 5.54 5.18 .006 In my country, the food waste generated by households has great ﬁnancial consequences4.72 4.92 4.53 .002 Awareness of food scarcity Foods are scarce over the world and should be consumed consciously5.26 5.42 5.16 .027 Foods are gifts of nature and have to be treated as such 5.21 5.34 5.08 .042 Attribution of responsibility In my country, households are responsible for a great proportion of the food waste4.83 5.09 4.54 .000 Perceived consumer e ﬀectiveness I believe that every little e ﬀort by consumers helps to reduce the food waste problem5.15 5.28 4.81 .002102 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. 2018 ). Almost half of the sample who completed the questionnaire were willing to buy novel, value-added snacks, a “circular food product ”, even though they did not have actual product experience. Our results showed awareness of the consequences of food waste was signi ﬁcant in di ﬀerentiating between people who are willing to purchase value-added foods and those who are not. Furthermore, consumers selected response options, such as helping farmers and caring for the natural environment, as factors that would motivate their purchase. These ﬁndings supports other studies highlighting morality is an in ﬂuential factor in explaining how people feel about food waste, as well as their intentions to avoid wasting food (Bortoleto et al., 2012 ; Gjerris & Gaiani, 2013 ; Parizeau et al., 2015 ; Setti et al., 2016 ; Stancu et al., 2016 ; Stefan et al., 2013 ; Watson & Meah, 2012 ). Some scholars argue that raising customer awareness may lead to more sustainable behaviour . Hence, the recommendations this research o ﬀers marketers is, when designing marketing communications for a circular economy, they should highlight empathy and care for farmers and show the various con-sequences of food waste for people and the natural environment, as well as educate con-sumers about their responsibility in curbing food waste. Although this article revealed themarket potential for novel, value-added foods, caution is advisable. Academic research on the adoption of innovations has shown that intentions are far from perfect predictors of behaviour . Findings linking willingness to buy value- added food and consumers’ awareness of the food waste problem found correlation, yet, future research could be conducted to test if a causal relationship exists by usingother methods or statistical tests. Future research may also wish to qualitatively explore consumer attitudes towards “circular foods ”or circular economy principles, how consumers can be involved in closing food waste loops ,or whether ethical issues  con ﬂict with other considerations . Food choice experiments or taste tests and willingness to purchase o ﬀer other alterna- tives, particularly since consumer taste is the single largest determinant of food choice . A diversity of factors explain early adoption of new products by con- sumers and other theories, such as the di ﬀusion of innovation model , or theory of planned behaviour , may be useful to explain adoption. This article ’s conceptual model may be used to incorporate other variables that increase, or deter, consumer demand for novel foods , such as environmental concerns, personal values, health concerns, level of involvementwith food, personality characteristics, or product-related attributes (i.e. price, taste, branding, eco-certiﬁ cation, natural attributes, etc.). Finally, semi-structured interviews with experts in the horticultural supply chain could be undertaken in relation to how the principles of a circular economy could be enacted, the type of training and knowl-edge required, and measures of performance or “circularity indicators ”(Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2015 ). Disclosure statement No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.RURAL SOCIETY 103 References Ajzen, I. . The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes ,50, 179 –211. Andersen, M. S. . An introductory note on the environmental economics of the circular economy. Sustainability Science ,2, 133 –140. Andrews, D. . The circular economy, design thinking and education for sustainability. Local Economy ,30, 305 –315. Arts, J. W., Frambach, R. T., & Bijmolt, T. H. . Generalizations on consumer innovation adoption: A meta-analysis on drivers of intention and behavior. International Journal of Research in Marketing ,28, 134 –144. Aschemann-Witzel, J., Jensen, J. H., Jensen, M. H., & Kulikovskaja, V. . Consumer behaviour towards price-reduced suboptimal foods in the supermarket and the relation to food waste in households. Appetite ,116, 246 –258. Australian Bureau of Statistics. .6523.0 - household income and wealth, Australia, 2015 –16. Retrieved from http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/6523.0Main +Features12015-16?OpenDocument Australian Bureau of Statistics. .6227.0 - education and work, Australia, May 2016 . Retrieved from http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6227.0 Australian Government. .Horticulture fact sheet . Retrieved from http://www.agriculture.gov. au/ag-farm-food/hort-policy/horticulture_fact_sheet Australian Government. .National food waste strategy: Halving Australia ’s food waste by 2030. Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia. Bioregen. . The process . Retrieved from http://www.vrm.com.au/bioregen/index. html#section2 Birau, M. M., & Faure, C. . It is easy to do the right thing: Avoiding the backﬁring e ﬀects of advertisements that blame consumers for waste. Journal of Business Research ,87, 102 –117. Bla des, L., Morgan, K., Douglas, R., Glover, S., De Rosa, M., Cromie, T., & Smyth, B. . Circular biogas-based economy in a rural agricultural setting. Energy Procedia ,123,8 9–96. Borrello, M., Caracciolo, F., Lombardi, A., Pascucci, S., & Cembalo, L. . Consumers ’perspec- tive on circular economy strategy for reducing food waste. Sustainability ,9, 141. Bortoleto, A. P., Kurisu, K. H., & Hanaki, K. . Model development for household waste pre- vention behaviour. Waste Management ,32, 2195 –2207. Bredahl, L. . Determinants of consumer attitudes and purchase intentions with regard to genetically modi ﬁed food –results of a cross-national survey. Journal of Consumer Policy ,24 , 23 –61. Brook Lyndhurst. .Food behaviour consumer research —ﬁndings from the quantitative survey. Brieﬁng article . Banbury: WRAP. Calvo-Porral, C., Medín, A. F., & Losada-López, C. . Can marketing help in tackling food waste?: Proposals in developed countries. Journal of Food Products Marketing ,23, 42 –60. Canali, M., Amani, P., Aramyan, L., Gheoldus, M., Moates, G., Östergren, K., …Vittuari, M. . Food waste drivers in Europe, from identi ﬁcation to possible interventions. Sustainability ,9, 37. Chamberlin, L., & Boks, C. . Marketing approaches for a circular economy: Using design fra- meworks to interpret online communications. Sustainability ,10, 2070. Chen, R., Rojas-Downing, M. M., Zhong, Y., Sa ﬀron, C. M., & Liao, W. . Life cycle and econ- omic assessment of anaerobic co-digestion of dairy manure and food waste. Industrial Biotechnology ,11, 127 –139. Cristóbal, J., Castellani, V., Manfredi, S., & Sala, S. . Prioritizing and optimizing sustainable measures for food waste prevention and management. Waste Management ,72,3–16. CSIRO. .Food & agribusiness roadmap . Retrieved from https://www.csiro.au/en/Do- business/Futures/Reports/Food-and-Agribusiness-Roadmap CSIRO. .A value chain for vegetable waste –from farm to fork . Retrieved from https:// events.csiro.au/Events/2018/March/21/Value-chain-for-vegetable-waste104 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. CSIRO. .Novel extruded food products. Retrieved from https://www.csiro.au/en/Research/ AF/Areas/Food/Making-new-sustainable-foods/Extrusion DeFelice, S. L. . The nutraceutical revolution: Its impact on food industry R&D. Trends in Food Science & Technology ,6, 59 –61. Delley, M., & Brunner, T. A. . Foodwaste within Swiss households: A segmentation of the population and suggestions for preventive measures. Resources, Conservation and Recycling , 122, 172 –184. Department of Agriculture. .Horticulture factsheet . Canberra: Australian Federal Government. Retrieved from http://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/hort-policy/horticulture_fact_sheet Duarte Alonso, A., & Northcote, J. . Investigating farmers ’involvement in value-added activities: A preliminary study from Australia. British Food Journal ,115, 1407 –1427. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. .Circularity indicators: An approach to measuring circularity. Isles of White: Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Ernst, E. . Functional foods, neutraceuticals, designer foods: Innocent fad or counterproduc- tive marketing ploy? European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 57, 353 –355. EU Commission. .Towards a circular economy: A zero waste programme for Europe , COM, 398. Euromonitor International. .Health & wellness 2017 - new insights & system refresher . Retrieved from https://blog.euromonitor.com/2017/09/global-consumer-trends-2017.html Euromonitor International. .World health & wellness company strategies –Part 1 . Retrieved from http://www.euromonitor.com/world-health-and-wellness-company-strategies-part-i- commitments/report Fleming, A., Dowd, A. M., Gaillard, E., Park, S., & Howden, M. .“Climate change is the least of my worries” : stress limitations on adaptive capacity. Rural Society ,24, 24 –41. Foley, J. A., Ramankutty, N., Brauman, K. A., Cassidy, E. S., Gerber, J. S., Johnston, M., …Zaks, D. P. M. . Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature ,478, 337 –342. Galanakis, C. M. . Recovery of high added-value components from food wastes: Conventional, emerging technologies and commercialized applications. Trends in Food Science & Technology ,26, 68 –87. Garcia-Garcia, G., Woolley, E., Rahimifard, S., Colwill, J., White, R., & Needham, L. . A methodology for sustainable management of food waste. Waste and Biomass Valorization ,8 , 2209– 2227. Garrone, P., Melacini, M., & Perego, A. . Opening the black box of food waste reduction. Food Policy ,46, 129 –139. Gjerris, M., & Gaiani, S. . Household food waste in Nordic countries: Estimations and ethical implications. Nordic Journal of Applied Ethics ,7, 6 –23. Göbel, C., Langen, N., Blumenthal, A., Teitscheid, P., & Ritter, G. . Cutting food waste through cooperation along the food supply chain. Sustainability ,7, 1429 –1445. Godfray, H. C. J., Beddington, J. R., Crute, I. R., Haddad, L., Lawrence, D., Muir, J. F., …Toulmin, C. . Food security: The challenge of feeding 9 billion people. Science ,327, 812 –818. Hamilton, C., Denniss, R., & Baker, D. .Wasteful consumption in Australia. Discussion article . Number 77, March 2005. The Australia Institute, Manuka, Australia. de Hooge, I. E., Oostindjer, M., Aschemann-Witzel, J., Normann, A., Loose, S. M., & Almli, V. L. . This apple is too ugly for me! Consumer preferences for suboptimal food products in the supermarket and at home. Food Quality and Preference ,56,8 0–92. Howe, J., Reilly, A., van den Broek, D., & Wright, C. F. . Working holiday makers in Australian horticulture: Labour market e ﬀect, exploitation and avenues for reform. Griﬃth Law Review . Ilyuk, V. . Like throwing a piece of me away: How online and in-store grocery purchase chan- nels a ﬀect consumers ’food waste. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services ,41,2 0–30. Ingrao, C., Faccilongo, N., Di Gioia, L., & Messineo, A. . Food waste recovery into energy in a circular economy perspective: A comprehensive review of aspects related to plant operation and environmental assessment. Journal of Cleaner Production ,184, 869 –892.RURAL SOCIETY 105 Jackson, M., Lederwasch, A., & Giurco, D. . Transitions in theory and practice: Managing metals in the circular economy. Resources ,3, 516 –543. Jurgilevich, A., Birge, T., Kentala-Lehtonen, J., Korhonen-Kurki, K., Pietikäinen, J., Saikku, L., & Schösler, H. . Transition towards circular economy in the food system. Sustainability ,8 , 69. Kibler, K. M., Reinhart, D., Hawkins, C., Motlagh, A. M., & Wright, J. . Food waste and the food-energy-water nexus: A review of food waste management alternatives. Waste Management , 74,5 2–62. Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., & Hekkert, M. 2017. Conceptualizing the circular economy: An analysis of 114 de ﬁnitions. Resources, Conservation & Recycling ,127, 221 –232. Kouwenhoven, G., Reddy Nalla, V., & Lossonczy von Losoncz, T. . Creating sustainable businesses by reducing food waste: A value chain framework for eliminating ine ﬃciencies. International Food and Agribusiness Management Review ,15, 119 –138. Laufenberg, G., Kunz, B., & Nystroem, M. . Transformation of vegetable waste into value added products:  the upgrading concept;  practical implementations. Bio-Resource Technology ,87, 167 –198. Lewandowski, M. . Designing the business models for circular economy —towards the con- ceptual framework. Sustainability ,8, 43. Lin, C. S. K., Pfaltzgra ﬀ, L. A., Herrero-Davila, L., Mubofu, E. B., Abderrahim, S., Clark, J. H., … Luque, R. . Food waste as a valuable resource for the production of chemicals, materials and fuels. Current situation and global perspective. Energy & Environmental Science ,6, 426–464. Lipinski, B., Hanson, C., Lomax, J., Kitinoja, L., Waite, R., & Searchinger, T. . Reducing food loss and waste. World Resources Institute Working Paper ,1–40. Lusk, J. L., Roosen, J., & Bieberstein, A. . Consumer acceptance of controversial new food technologies: Causes and roots of controversies. Annual Review of Resource Economics ,6, 381–405. Mallin son, L. J., Russell, J. M., & Barker, M. E. . Attitudes and behaviour towards convenience food and food waste in the United Kingdom. Appetite ,103,1 7–28. Martin, D., & Schouten, J. .Sustainable marketing . Boston: Prentice Hall. McDonough, W., & Braungart, M. . Design for the triple top line: New tools for sustainable commerce. Corporate Environmental Strategy ,9, 251 –258. Mena, C., Terry, L. A., Williams, A., & Ellram, L. . Causes of waste across multi-tier supply networks: Cases in the UK food sector. International Journal of Production Economics ,152, 144–158. Mirabella, N., Castellani, V., & Sala, S. . Current options for the valorization of food manu- facturing waste: A review. Journal of Cleaner Production ,65,2 8–41. Murray, A., Skene, K., & Haynes, K. . The circular economy: An interdisciplinary exploration of the concept and application in a global context. Journal of Business Ethics ,140, 369 –380. Neﬀ, R. A., Spiker, M. L., & Truant, P. L. . Wasted food: US consumers ’reported awareness, attitudes, and behaviors. PloS one ,10, e0127881. Pagotto, M., & Halog, A. . Towards a circular economy in Australian agri-food industry: An application of input-output oriented approaches for analyzing resource e ﬃciency and competi- tiveness potential. Journal of Industrial Ecology ,20, 1176 –1186. Papargyropoulou, E., Lozano, R., Steinberger, J. K., Wright, N., & bin Ujang, Z. . The food waste hierarchy as a framework for the management of food surplus and food waste. Journal of Cleaner Production ,76, 106 –115. Parizeau, K., von Massow, M., & Martin, R. . Household-level dynamics of food waste pro- duction and related beliefs, attitudes, and behaviours in Guelph, Ontario. Waste Management , 35, 207 –217. Poortinga, W., Pidgeon, N., & Lorenzoni, I. .Public perceptions of nuclear power, climate change and energy options in Britain: Summary ﬁndings of a survey conducted during October and November 2005 . Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research. School of Environmental Sciences. University of East Anglia.106 B. MCCARTHY ET AL. Potting, J., Hekkert, M. P., Worrell, E., & Hanemaaijer, A. . Circular economy: Measuring innovation in the product chain . PBL Publishers, The Hague, The Netherlands. Queensland Government. . Adapting to market changes project . Retrieved from https://www. daf.qld.gov.au/business-priorities/plants/fruit-and-vegetables/fruit-and-nuts/pineapples/ adapting-to-market-changes-project Richards, C., Lawrence, G., Loong, M., & Burch, D. . A toothless chihuahua? The Australian competition and consumer commission, neoliberalism and supermarket power in Australia.Rural Society ,21, 250 –263. Rodríguez Cohard, J. C., Sánchez Martínez, J. D., & Gallego Simón, V. J. . The upgrading strategy of olive oil producers in southern Spain: Origin, development and constraints. Rural Society ,26, 30 –47. Rogers, E. M. .Diﬀusion of innovations . New York: Free Press. Schwartz, S. H., & Howard, J. A. . A normative decision-making model of altruism. In J. P. Rushton , Altruism and helping behaviour: Social, personality and developmental perspec- tives . Hilldale, NJ: Erlbaum. Secondi, L., Principato, L., Ruini, L., & Guidi, M. . Reusing food waste in food manufacturing companies: The case of the tomato-sauce supply chain. Sustainability ,11, 2154. Setti, M., Falasconi, L., Segrè, A., Cusano, I., & Vittuari, M. . Italian consumers ’income and food waste behavior. British Food Journal ,118, 1731 –1746. Siro, I., Kapolna, E., Kapolna, B., & Lugasi, A. . Functional food. Product development, mar- keting and consumer acceptance —A review. Appetite ,51, 456 –467. Stancu, V., Haugaard, P., & Lähteenmäki, L. . Determinants of consumer food waste behav- iour: Two routes to food waste. Appetite ,96,7–17. Stefan, V., van Herpen, E., Tudoran, A. A., & Lähteenmäki, L. . Avoiding food waste by Romanian consumers: The importance of planning and shopping routines. Food Quality and Preference ,28, 375 –381. Steg, L., & Vlek, C. .  Encouraging pro-environmental behaviour: An integrative review and research agenda. Journal of Environmental Psychology ,29, 309 –317. Sundrop Farms. . Sundrop system . Retrieved from http://www.sundropfarms.com/ Thφgersen, J. . The ethical consumer. Moral norms and packaging choice. Journal of Consumer Policy ,22, 439 –460. Turner, B., & Hope, C. . Ecological connections: Reimagining the role of farmers ’markets. Rural Society ,23, 175 –187. United Nations. .UN announces ﬁrst-ever global standard to measure food loss and waste . Retrieved from https://news.un.org/en/story/2016/06/531392-un-announces- ﬁrst-ever-global- standard-measure-food-loss-and-waste van de Mortel, T. F. . Faking it: Social desirability response bias in self-report research. Australian Journal of Advanced Nursing ,25, 40 –48. Verbeke, W. . Consumer acceptance of functional foods: Socio-demographic, cognitive and attitudinal determinants. Food Quality and Preference ,16, 45 –57. Watson, M., & Meah, A. . Food, waste and safety: Negotiating con ﬂicting social anxieties into the practices of domestic provisioning. The Sociological Review ,60, 102 –120. Whitehair, K. J., Shanklin, C. W., & Brannon, L. A. . Written messages improve edible food waste behaviors in a university dining facility. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics , 113, 63 –69. World Resources Institute. .Creating a sustainable food future . Retrieved from https://www. wri.org/our-work/project/world-resources-report-creating-sustainable-food-future World Resources Institute. .What ’s food loss and waste go to do with climate change? A lot, actually . Retrieved from https://www.wri.org/blog/2015/12/whats-food-loss-and-waste-got-do- climate-change-lot-actually Woźniak, J., & Pactwa, K. . Overview of polish mining wastes with circular economy model and its comparison with other wastes. Sustainability ,10, 3994. Yuan, Z., Bi, J., & Moriguichi, Y. . The circular economy: A new development strategy in China. Journal of Industrial Ecology ,10, 4–8.RURAL SOCIETY 107 

