Food waste valorisation and circular economy concepts in insect production and processing Shikha Ojha, Sara Bußler, Oliver K. Schlüter⇑ Quality and Safety of Food and Feed, Leibniz Institute for Agricultural Engineering and Bioeconomy , 14469 Potsdam, Germany article info Article history: Received 24 April 2020 Revised 16 August 2020 Accepted 4 September 2020 Keywords: Food loss reductionEdible insectsAlternative proteinsCircular bioeconomyFood processingGlocalizationabstract Food loss and waste are serious threats to the sustainability of our food systems. Innovative and multi- faced solutions are continuously being proposed, tested and implemented by researchers, governmentauthorities, non-government bodies and food industries to tackle this problem of food waste. Insect- based bioconversions have been reported as a marketable solution for reducing food waste. This rather novel approach can efﬁciently convert several tonnes of food waste into valuable products includinghuman food, animal feed, fertiliser and other secondary industrial compounds. This paper couples the production of edible insects with the valorisation of food waste, providing an attractive key for closing the loop of food value chain. Current status of insect processing and their importance in circular economyis also discussed in detail. /C2112020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Contents 1. Introduction . . . ...................................................................................................... 6 0 0 2. Food waste for mass production of insects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................ 6 0 2 3. Importance of insects in circular economy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................ 6 0 3 4. Current status of insect processing . . . . ................................................................................... 6 0 5 4.1. Blanching . . . . . . . . . . . . . ......................................................................................... 6 0 6 4.2. Drying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ......................................................................................... 6 0 6 4.3. Fractionation/extraction . ......................................................................................... 6 0 6 5. Concepts to close the cycle . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................... 6 0 6 6. Conclusions and future trends. . . . . . . . ................................................................................... 6 0 7 Declaration of Competing Interest . . . . ................................................................................... 6 0 8 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................... 6 0 8 References . . . . ...................................................................................................... 6 0 8 1. Introduction Food loss and waste are serious threats to the sustainability of our food systems. According to the Food and Agriculture Organisa- tion of the United Nations , roughly one-third of the global food production for human consumption (c.a. 1.3 billion tonnes per year) is lost or wasted . One of the SustainableDevelopment Goals  outlined by United Nations’ in 2015 intends to ‘halve the per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses’ by 2030. Recently, governments are starting to be aware of it and are implementing food policies to tackle this problem. Policy-makers, food industries and retailers, researchers and non- government organisations are working together to trigger a social movement towards a greater appreciation of food and minimising the overall food waste and its impacts. The ﬁrst step of an effective food policy https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2020.09.010 0956-053X/ /C2112020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.⇑Corresponding author. E-mail address: oschlueter@atb-potsdam.de .Waste Management 118  600–609 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Waste Management journal homepage: www.else vier.com/loc ate/wasman

involves identifying and quantifying the type of wastes. The terms food losses and waste are often used interchangeably, but some studies have tried to differentiate them based on the stages of a food supply chain . Food losses can be deﬁned as the discarded food  at the pro- duction, post-harvest and processing stages of food supply chain and when it is thrown away by the ﬁnal users at the retail and con- sumption levels, it can be termed as food waste . The term food waste comprises leftover food generated from agricul- tural production, postharvest handling and storage, further pro- cessing of food, wholesale and retail trade distribution, kitchens of large-scale consumers and private households ( Edjabou et al., 2016 ). A classiﬁcation of food waste types is proposed in Fig. 1 , which considers the sources and modes of food losses and waste generation during the food chain from farm to fork. During agricul-tural production, losses can be resulted due to mechanical damage and/or spillage during harvest operation; e.g. threshing, fruit pick- ing, etc. Postharvest handling and storage losses include the spil- lage and degradation during handling, storage and transportation between farm and distribution. Further, industrial or domestic pro- cessing of food also generate losses during various unit operations including sorting, washing, peeling, slicing and boiling or because of faults and accidents in process lines. Food distribution at whole- sale markets, supermarkets and retailers level also generate losses and waste of food. The last in the value chain is at consumption level, including losses and waste in the home or restaurants/caterer. Food waste and loss can further be classiﬁed into three broad categories – avoidable, partly  avoidable and unavoidable food waste . For industry, avoidable food waste includes damaged or contaminated products that have not been used. At household consumer end, avoidable food waste occurs for a number of reasons, including over-purchasing, poor food preparation techniques, inadequate storage and excessive serving sizes . The avoidable component of food waste accounts for a substantial part of the total household waste. For example, a study in Denmark sampled and measured the food waste quantities in 1474 households and reported thatthe avoidable food waste accounts for ca. 56% of total household food waste . Partly  avoidable food wastes are mainly generated because of different consumer prac- tices and habits, e.g. bread crusts and apple skins. Unavoidable food waste usually arises during the preparation and consumption of foods. This mainly includes both non-edible constituents (e.g. bones, banana peels or the like) and edible parts . In industrialised countries, majority of the food waste is gener- ated in the later stage of supply chain at consumer level. On a per- capita basis, consumers in Europe waste food between 95 and 115 kg/year . In the EU, over 50% of the total food waste generated occurs at the household or consumer level. Other sectors contributing to food waste in the EU are food processing , food services , production , wholesale and retail  . Thus, in theory at least, the current largest potential for reducing waste lies in the consumer sector. Various research scientists, food banks, government and non-government agencies have proposed and implemented innovative strategies to tackle food waste problem. The core of these strategies is based on three R’s of waste management – Reduce, Reuse and Recycle. The United States Environmental Protection Agency  has pro- posed a waste management hierarchy considering that all materi- als and waste streams in all circumstances cannot be managed by one single strategy .Fig. 2 presents a possible waste management hierarchy ranking the three main waste man- agement strategies and their sub-categories from most to least environmentally preferred measures. Food waste can be reduced by improving each unit of a food chain; mainly, processing, product development, storage, distribution, marketing, labelling and cook- ing methods. Reuse of food waste can be achieved by creating effective channel between potential food donors to hunger relief organisations. Food waste can be recycled by feeding to livestock, anaerobic digestion, composting and creating bioenergy and natural fertilisers . Most of the food waste pro- grams developed today tends to focus on structural changes and technological development and often overlook the role of house- hold consumers. Behavioural change of consumers is another potential intervention to minimise household waste. Linder et al. Fig. 1. . Food loss and waste throughout the food chain.S. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 601  conducted a study to test whether an information interven- tion , designed based on theories from environmental psychology and behavioural economics, can be effective in promot- ing recycling of food waste in a suburb area of Stockholm city, Sweden. The results indicated a statistically signiﬁcant increase in food waste recycled compared to a control group in the research area. Several researchers have proposed using insect-based biocon- version as a marketable solution for reducing food waste which has received increased worldwide attention in recent years (Cheng et al., 2017; van Huis and Oonincx, 2017; Van Huis et al., 2013 ). This rather novel approach is based on the fact that indus- trial insect rearing can efﬁciently convert several tonnes of food waste into valuable products including human food, animal feed, fertiliser and secondary industrial compounds (e.g., biofuel, lubri- cants, pharmaceuticals, dyes) . Being a natural component of the diets of many animals and birds, insects could be used for feeding farmed animals including ﬁsh, poultry and pigs . In this paper, the potential of coupling the production of edible insects and the valorisation of food waste will be discussed. Current status and future outlook of insect pro- cessing and their importance in circular economy is also discussed in detail. 2. Food waste for mass production of insects The commercial rearing of insects is a promising approach for transforming the nutrients losses back into the food chain in forms of protein-rich animal feed, human food and fertiliser. The black soldier ﬂy , Hermetia illucens is a popular choice for industrial rearing, owing to its short life cycle, superior feed conversion ratio and the fact that it can convert and recover nutrients from a vast variety of organic materials. BSF can reduce organic waste biomass by 50–60% and turn them into high protein biomass ( Sheppard et al., 1994 ). Further, the nutritive proﬁle of BSF larvae is compara- ble to oilseeds including hempseed, ﬂaxseed and rapeseed with up to 28% of protein and 40% of oil content . Currently, each Agriprotein’s facility has developed a capacity of diverting 350 tonnes of food waste per day and producing protein, oil and organic soil conditioner using BSF . Several other companies and start-ups from all over the world including Entosystem , Protix ( www.pro- tix.eu ), and Goterra  are rapidly expanding to address the issue of food waste by insect-based bioconversion.With supplies of global food waste estimated at 1.3 billion ton- nes and growing, commercialisation of insect-based bioconversion represents a promising economic sense for businesses. However, there are some challenges in rearing insects on food waste in a safe and efﬁcient way and hence continuous advancements are being made with insect breeding, rearing diets and conditions for indus- trial rearing. Optimisation of insect rearing broadly depends on a) composition and consistency of insect feed, b) selection of insects, c) other technological parameters such as rearing conditions, and d) regulatory guidelines ( Cortes Ortiz et al., 2016; Vantomme et al., 2012 ). In speciﬁc to rearing insects on food waste; physical, chemical and microbiological characteristics of the food waste including moisture content, nutrient proﬁle and presence of non- preferred compounds, microbial safety, stability and occurrence of non-organic contaminants such as plastics are some of the key parameters to be considered. For example, vegetative food wastes which are generally low in protein content can be used as feed for both black soldier ﬂy larvae and mealworm larvae, but may not be sufﬁcient for houseﬂy larvae . Restau- rant and kitchen wastes containing meat can be well suited for houseﬂy and black soldier ﬂy larvae ( Cheng et al., 2017; Hogsette, 1992; Manurung et al., 2016 ). Additionally, Cheng et al.  also reported that the black soldier ﬂy larvae can tolerate of wet wastes and high temperatures allowing them to utilise dif- ferent waste streams. Variability in diets can have big implications for growth rates, developmental time and downstream processing, which makes stable process control and operation challenging. Thetype of substrate has been shown to signiﬁcantly impact both the developmental rate and nutritional composition of insects (Spranghers et al., 2017 ). Food wastes are rich in nutrient and water content, hence prone to faster putrefaction, resulting in odour problems and potential proliferation of moulds, foodborne pathogens or toxins. Sorting and optimisation of crude organic waste with a combination of physical and biological treatments, such as homogenisation and pre-fermentation, respectively can be performed for the waste stabilisation and the improved food safety. Pre-fermentation can also help in enhancing the digestibil- ity and bioavailability of nutrients to the insects as most nutrients in raw food waste are found in insoluble form ( Law and Wein, 2018 ). Valorisation of food waste using fermentation and then use of edible insects, especially of the BSF has shown promising results . Further, the selection of suitable insect species with speciﬁc attributes; such as feeding behaviour, morphology (i.e. large mouth part for masticating food, soft bodies for moving through sub- Fig. 2. . Reduce, reuse, recycle concept for food waste.S. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 602 strates, behavioural avoidance of poor egg laying sites), shorter development time and immunity to possible diseases are impor- tant considerations for bioconversion of a highly specialised food waste. In addition to the selection of suitable insects, insect breed- ing can be useful in utilising food waste more efﬁciently. However, insect breeding research is still in an initial phase and has a huge potential in future with a growth in the insect business in the western countries in the insect business ( Fowles and Nansen, 2020 ). Technological factors such as temperature, humidity and light also inﬂuence the rearing of insects. An important hurdle of using food waste is at the regulatory level. According to European regulations on animal by-products , Article 3, farmed insects are included in the deﬁnition of ‘farmed animals’ . Hence, insects can only be produced with substrates eligible as feed materials for farmed animals andhence it is prohibited to the use of certain materials such as man- ure or catering waste containing animal by-products, processed animal protein . Many agencies, such as Promot- ing Insects for Human Consumption & Animal Feed  is promoting and advocating towards adapting existing EU policies and legislation, which opens up the possibility of modiﬁcation of current feed list. 3. Importance of insects in circular economy Our current food production and consumption habits are unsus- tainable. Circular economy concept can offer tools to enhance andoptimise for sustainability of a food system ( Jurgilevich et al., 2016 ). A sustainable food cycle can have ﬁve stages: food produc- tion, processing, distribution, food consumption, and food waste management . If each of these steps is managed properly, we can achieve overall sustainability in food cycle. The purpose of sustainable food systems is to build a better future. The mission is to create sustainable values by pro- viding food products to satisfy the consumer needs while consider- ing the core values of food safety, quality and less environmentalimpacts. Over the last decade, circular economy has become one of the most important themes worldwide, which fosters the pro- motion of sustainable and resource-efﬁcient policies for long- term socio-economic and environmental beneﬁts . Circular Economy concept aims to overcome the linear pattern of production and consumption by adopting strategies of a circular or ‘‘closing the loop” system in industrial production systems . As discussed earlier, using the food waste for rearing insects provides an attractive key for closing the loop of food value chain . Studies have shown that insects may offer signiﬁcantly better food conversion ratios and require signiﬁcantly fewer inputs in the form of land, fresh water and feed compared to traditional livestock systems . The other possible environmental advantage of insect farming overlivestock production has been described as emit fewer greenhouse gases emission during their cultivation . However, some researchers have shown their concern and demanded for an urgent need of further research before commer- cial mass production of insects in order to avoid possible environ- ment hazards. These concerns are mainly related to selection of suitable insect species, their housing and feed requirements, managing their waste and possibility of ecosystem imbalance escaping insects from insect farms . There are several tools and methods for evaluating sustainabil- ity for a food processing technology and the most recognised envi- ronmental assessment method is life cycle assessment . It is a tool used for the quantitative assessment of inputs, energy ﬂows and environmental impacts of systems, products and services. The basic LCA methodology is based on ISO 14040, consisting of four steps: a) deﬁning the goal and scope, b) creating the life- cycle inventory, c) impact assessemnt, and ﬁnally d) result inter- pretation. In a food system, a full cradle-to-grave LCA would con- sider each steps starting from production of raw material, processing, manufacturing, delivering, consuming, and managing the end-of-life. Because of the complexity of this approach and the fact that the data for ultimate disposal of food is not included Fig. 3. . Concept of an ideal insects production and processing system integrated in the food chain: the waste from food production, processing and consumpti on is utilized for insect rearing; reared insects entering the food chain as whole or a nutrient source in food production and processing; the residues from insect re aring and processing serves as natural fertilizer for agricultural crop production. .S. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 603 Table 1 . Research studies presenting applications of life cycle assessment  in evaluation of environmental impact of insects for food and feed product ion systems. System Geographical regionSystem boundariesGoal and scope Functional unit Main environmental impact categoryMain ﬁndings References Commercial mealworm production systemNetherlands Cradle-to-farm- gateTo compare the environmental impact of producing mealworm and superworm vs. conventional sources ofanimal proteinMass based (kg of fresh product andkg of edible protein)Climate change, energy use, land useMealworms produce much less GHG’s and require much less land, thanchickens, pigs and cattle(Oonincx & De Boer,2012 ) Laboratory plant for houseﬂy larvae rearingNetherlands To assess the environmental impact of organic waste fed common houseﬂy larvae as livestock feedMass based (ton of larvae meal on dry matter basis)Climate change, energy use, land useWaste fed larvae require less land, however can have indirect consequences including energy use and global warming potential(van Zanten et al., 2015 ) Various systems from databaseGlobal Cradle-to-plate To compare environmental performance of different meatsubstitutes based on data fromliterature and other sourcesMass based (kg of ready forconsumptionproducts, such asfried meat or meatanalogue)climate change, metal and fossil fuel depletion, ozone layerdepletion, human toxicity,acidiﬁcation, ecotoxicity, landoccupationhighest impacts for lab-grown meat and mycoprotein-based analogues ,medium impacts forchicken, dairy-based and gluten-basedmeat substitutes, and the lowest impactfor insect-based and soy meal-based substitutes(Smetana et al.,2015 ) Industrial scale production of BSFGermany Cradle-to- processing gateto assess the environmental impacts of insect production for both food and feedon an industrial scaleMass based (kg of dried defattedinsect powder andkg of ready-for-consumption freshproduct atprocessing gate)Climate change, human toxicity acidiﬁcation, ecotoxicity, ozoneDepletion, eutrophication, landoccupationChicken meat and whey proteins impact is 2–5 times higher than insect products Pilot system for food waste bioconversionby BSFItaly Cradle-to-gate to assess the environmental impacts of insect-based feed products fed withdifferent waste productsMass based (ton of food waste, kg ofprotein and kg oflipids)Climate change, acidiﬁcation, ecotoxicity, human toxicity, ozoneDepletion, eutrophicationHigher environmental impacts are caused by compost and feed productionfollowed by the transportation of foodwaste, higher GWP and energy use andlower land use of insect bioconversionsystem compared to soy meal andrapeseed oil systems(Salomone et al.,2017 ) Small scale manure and biowaste basedproduction systemsof houseﬂy and BSFWest Africa Cradle to gate to provide a better understanding of production characteristics and of thefactors inﬂuencing the systems’performance in speciﬁc context ofregional small scale insect farmingMass based (kg of larvae meal on drymatter basis)Land use, water consumption, fossil energy use,Black solider ﬂy system has highest conversion efﬁciency, however theconversion efﬁciency is dependent oncomplex interaction of insect species,nutritional properties of the rearingsubstrate, rearing techniques andclimatic conditions.(Roffeis, et al.,2017 ) Medium scale production system for ﬁeld and house cricketsThailand Cradle-to-farm- gateTo compare regional broiler and cricket farmingMass based (kg of edible mass) and nutritionally basedclimate change, acidiﬁcation, ecotoxicity, eutrophication, ozone depletion, human toxicity, waterdepletion, mineral and fossil fueldepletionOverall, the environmental impacts associated with broiler production were greater than for cricket production(Halloran et al., 2017 ) Commercial production systemfor mealwormsFrance Cradle-to-mill gateto assess environmental impacts associated with production ofmealworm meal with high proteincontent for poultry and trout feedMass based (kg of larvae meal)climate change, acidiﬁcation potential, eutrophication potential,land useMealworm meal production currently had higher environmental impacts,especially energy demand, thanproduction of other sources of protein used in animal feed(Thévenot et al.,2018 ) A highly productive BSF pilot plant withinsight on futureupscalingNetherlands andSwitzerlandCradle-to-gate To assess the environmental effect of food industry side streamstransformation into intermediateproducts for feed and food and toprovide guidance to industries toidentify most promising directions towards sustainable insect productionMass based (kg of dried and pelletizedorganic fertilizer,fresh BSF puree,proteinconcentrated meal and BSF fat)climate change, ecosystem, human health, ecotoxicity, globalwarming, acidiﬁcation, landoccupation, water use, fossil fueldepletion, eutrophication,carcinogens, non-carcinogens, ozone depletionFresh insect biomass is almost twice more sustainable than fresh chickenmeat and insect production haspotential for more sustainable protein,fertilizer and lipid production(Smetana et al.,2019 )S. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 604 in the analysis, variations of LCA are commonly applied in food sys- tems. These variation could be based on cradle-to-farm out gate (including production of ingredients, agriculture, and initial pro- cessing at farm), gate-to-customer (including transportation from farm to factory, processing and packaging, and transportation to customer), and cradle-to-customer or farm-to-fork (including farming, processing and packaging, and transportation to cus- tomer) . The LCAs have only recently been applied to insect rearing systems. Recently, some research studies have applied LCA for evaluation of environmental impact of insects for food and feed production systems. The main features of these studies are presented in Table 1 . The ﬁrst study on LCA applied to insect farming for human consumption was published in 2012  which was followed by studies on insect system for animal feed,ﬁsh feed, organic fertilizers. Recently, Smetana et al.  per- formed a LCA of food industry side streams transformation using Hermetia illucens into intermediate products applicable for feed and food purposes. Apart from general concepts of insect produc- tion and processing, they considered more detailed dataset and included the production of raw materials , pro- cessing and storage of feed, growth cycle of H. illucens (from egg production, larvae hatching, growing and larvae harvesting), and processing of outputs into different products (fresh insect puree, protein concentrate, insect fat and organic fertiliser). The system was considered to be a highly productive pilot plant with insight of future upscaling scenarios. Attributional and consequential LCA approaches were applied for the deﬁnition of more sustainable options. The analyses indicated that the fresh insect biomass was nearly twice more sustainable than fresh chicken meat. Such initial studies point toward a lesser environmental impact of insect pro- duction; however, there remains a lack of knowledge in this area. This is still unsure if the insects processing industry will be sus- tainable and environmentally friendly. From sustainability per- spective, the possibility of using food waste which is otherwise unavailable as food for people (e.g., unavoidable food loss and waste) improves the system feed conversion efﬁciency when view- ing insect farming. Insects have a strategic positioning in food value chain. Amongst the grand challenges in sustainable food sys- tem, the main challenges ahead of insect processing are develop- ment of efﬁcient and environmentally friendly processing technologies, waste minimisation, recovery and incorporation of by-products/ co-products. With abundant research, knowledge and examples from other food sources, insect industry is at the forefront for the development of a set of new best practices to implement a true circular economy and overall sustainability from its foundation. 4. Current status of insect processing The insect for feed and feed industry is moving ahead at a fast pace. Although edible insects currently have a niche market at this stage with enormous potential which is expected to grow for potential feed and food applications. Global Markets Insights  estimates that market volume will increase from ini- tially 33 mm USD in 2015 to 522 mm USD in 2023 which corre- sponds to a yearly growth rate of 41%. It is estimated yearly growth of 71% from 106 million USD in 2016 to 1.5 bn USD in 2021 . This enormous growth is primarily driven by insects as a food ingredient in powders and shakes (40% market share) and food bars  according to GMI  . A number of production and storage strategies have been devel- oped to improve farming of insects and it is now crucial to imple- ment appropriate post-harvesting technologies for the preservation, quality improvement, transformation, fractionation,Table 1  System Geographical regionSystem boundariesGoal and scope Functional unit Main environmental impact categoryMain ﬁndings References Commercial BSF kitchen wastetreatment systemIndonesia Cradle-to-gate to assess the GWP of a BSF waste treatment facility compare tocomposting facilityMass based (ton of biowaste)direct N 2O and CH 4emission, electricity consumption, GWPBSF treatment direct GHG emissions were 47 times lower than fromwindrow composting and ﬁshmealproduction substitution by BSF larvae meal can reduce the GWP up to 30%(Mertenat et al.,2019 ) Small scale mealworm meal productionsystem for feed introut productionsystemFrance Cradle-to-farm gateTo assess the inﬂuence of replacing ﬁsh meal with mealworm meal  on overallenvironmental impactsMass based (kg of pan-sized trout)Eutrophication potential, acidiﬁcation potential, climatechange, land use, energy demand,water consumption, bioticresource useMealworm meal resulted in lower impact in terms of biotic resource useand water consumption compared toﬁsh meal but did not reduce otherenvironmental impacts(Le Feon et al.,2019 ) GHG- green house gases, GWP- Global warming potential, BSF- black solider ﬂy.S. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 605 distribution, and storage of insects and insect products ( Melgar- Lalanne et al., 2019a ). Processing of insects can vary depending on the application i.e. either consumption of insects as a whole or of biomolecules obtained after suitable fractionation. Histori- cally processing of insects obtained from wild harvest e.g. collec- tion from forests, natural water resources or agriculture ﬁelds or reared at commercial scale include boiling, roasting, smoking, fry- ing, stewing and curing to improve nutritional, and sensorial attri- butes and shelf life of products . Modern manufacturing processes include both conventional and innovative processing techniques. Some of the unit operations applicable to insect processing are blanching, drying, grinding, roasting and fractionation. This list is not exhaustive and other pro- cessing techniques, e.g., fermentation, salting and non-thermal technologies can be used to produce variety of insect products asthe global appetite for insects increases. The existing processes employed for insects are discussed below: 4.1. Blanching Most small and larger scale commercialised edible insect pro- cesses employ blanching as a pretreatment to inactivate degrada- tive enzymes and to reduce microorganisms responsible for food poisoning and spoilage . Convention- ally, it is a process involving a series of steps; mainly placing a food product in boiling water for a short period, removing, and then immediate cooling in ice or cold running water to stop the thermal treatment. Hot water blanching can signiﬁcantly reduce counts of total mesophilic bacteria, total psychrotrophic bacteria, lactic acid bacteria and yeast and moulds in insects; however, as expected, it has been less effective against mesophilic bacterial spores ( Megido et al., 2016; Vandeweyer et al., 2017 ). Besides the well-known positive impact of blanching, the hot water blanching can affect the physical and chemical characteris- tics of food. Speciﬁcally to insects, a slight increase in moisture has been reported in several studies. For example, Vandeweyer et al.  reported an increase of moisture content (from 62.81% to 70.44% after 40 s) in In T. molitor L. larvae; however the water activity remained constant. They reported the cause to be the absorption and entrapment of water inside the larva just below the chitinous exoskeleton. According to Azzollini et al.  , high temperature blanching may result structural changes in some proteins, resulting in alteration, denaturation and crosslinking of protein molecules. However, there are no reports of signiﬁcant adverse effects in chemical composition in blanched insects compared to fresh ones, which can possibly be attributed to lack of more suitable and speciﬁc protein analysis ( Azzollini et al., 2016 ). Additionally, blanching also decreased in luminosity in the samples, which could be because of physical as well as chemical phenomena. The main physical phenomenon was pro- posed to be the modiﬁed refraction index resulting from the higher moisture value in blanched samples when compared to dry sam- ples. The other factor could be solubility of nutrients in blanched samples, which may increase certain secondary reactions, such as non-enzymatic browning reactions, resulting in reduced lightness of blanched larvae. In last few decades, innovative surface decontamination tech- nologies with higher energy efﬁciency, less nutrient loss and less environmental impacts are being developed and applied. Innova- tive blanching technologies including microwave, ohmic, and infrared combined with hot air or steam blanching can also be employed to insects. For example Bußler et al.  employed surface dielectric-barrier air-discharge plasma for improving microbial safety of T. molitor L. and observed a signiﬁcant reduction in microbial load while improving the techno-functional propertiesof Tenebrio ﬂour for product applications. Table 2 summarises the research ﬁndings in blanching treatments applied to edible insects. 4.2. Drying Drying is one of the most extensively used technologies for increased shelf-life of foods. Drying techniques have evolved a range of traditional methods  to modern, novel and advanced methods including freeze-drying and hybrid drying technologies. Drying results in reduction of total water content and water activity therefore restrict the availability of free water for degradative enzymatic reactions and microbial growth. Drying results in improved safety and shelf-life during dis- tribution and storage of insect products. Sun-drying, oven-drying and freeze-drying are some of the applied technologies for drying whole edible insects, insect ﬂours and powders ( Azzollini et al., 2018; Kröncke et al., 2018; Niassy et al., 2016 ). Drying followed by grinding the whole edible insects into unrecognisable insect powders has been reported to be one of the preferred technologies for increasing human consumption of insects in western countries . 4.3. Fractionation/extraction As mentioned earlier, in Western countries, consumer accep- tance of eating whole insects is still a major challenge; thus, insect protein in form of powder, supplement or fractions can be more acceptable for human food applications ( Caparros Megido et al., 2014 ). Further, the production of protein rich ﬂour from insects for incorporation into foods provides an opportunity of versatile application of insect protein in human diets. Extraction of insect macromolecules can be carried out using water, organic solvents, and enzymes and the extraction rate, extraction yields and the physicochemical, functional, and bioac- tive properties of macromolecules depend on the insect matrix and solvent used . Although many different types of extraction techniques have been tested to recover key macromolecules from insects, however, they rely on using huge amounts of chemical solvents, which is not considered as eco- friendly or food-friendly ( L’hocine et al., 2006; Soetemans et al., 2019 ). The use of clean and green extraction techniques is gaining recognition owning to the consumer demand of chemical/additive free ingredients . Therefore, it is needed to improve efﬁciency, reduce costs and develop more environmental friendly processes. Purschke et al.  reported that the pre- treatments  can be employed for dry fractionation of insects based ingredients including protein rich fractions, chitin etc. Employing novel pretreatments in combi- nation with extraction technologies can improve recoveries of keymacromolecule from insect matrices. Table 3 presents potential technological solutions for extraction of insect fractions either by physical techniques  or wet chemistry employ- ing solvents. 5. Concepts to close the cycle The production of insects, even on formulated diet is reported to be more efﬁcient than rearing some traditional livestock ( van Huis and Oonincx, 2017 ). However, production of insects can result in large quantity of organic waste, consisting of frass, exuviae, and uneaten feed, which is of low value and is commonly disposed of by spreading on agricultural ﬁelds . The concept of the land application of insect frass enables the reintroduction of insect rearing side stream back into the food production chain, thus is consistent with circular economy’s principles. It has beenS. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 606 reported as a better alternative to linear models that would end with energy recovery or its disposal by incineration and landﬁlling . The chemical and physical properties of insect frass are compatible to other commercial fertilisers and it has shown great potential to be upcycled as fertilising product (e.g. soil impro- ver, organic fertiliser, or compost material) . For instance, Poveda et al.  reported that the frass produced byT. molitor can be potentially used as a biofertiliser in organic farming owing to its nutritional content and associated microbiota which many help in facilitating the absorption of nutrients. Fur- ther, a new opportunity for the inclusion of insect frass in the pro-duction of biogas has also shown promising results in a cost- efﬁcient and sustainable manner . The authors reported a biomethane potential similar to some manures, plantwastes and sewage sludges. Taking advantage of the high fat con- tent of some insect larvae, insect fat has successfully been used for production of biodiesel of similar qualities to oilseeds derived fuel . An ideal insects-for-food and feed production system can be presented in Fig. 3 . The ﬁgure presents a basic design of mass production of insects using food waste from food production cycle. Rearing of insects for bioconver- sion, with different steps for producing valuable products and side streams in a holistic way is indicated in the ﬁgure. 6. Conclusions and future trends According to Global Market Insights, the global edible insects market is expected to register signiﬁcant gains  from2020 to 2026, owing to increasing protein demand, changing diet- ary needs and rapid penetration of edible insects preparations in global market place. It has also been projected that edible insects market demand from ﬂour application may witness signiﬁcant gains during the forecasted timeframe from a value over USD 1.5 billion by 2026 . However, according toBakalis et al., 2020 the development of future food chains will require a balance between the current, ‘‘global”, food supply prac- tices and other, ‘‘local”, trends and will ﬁnally result in ‘‘glocal” strategies. Many companies are the front runners in research and development of insect-based proteins for both food and feed. To fully evaluate insect industry, along with the more common crite- ria such as quality, food safety and expected return on investment, an extensive assessment of the economic, environmental and social sustainability impacts of insect industry would be para- mount. In its growing phase, the insect industry has high potential for realising circular bioeconomy strategies in an advanced food production scenarios.Table 2 Blanching treatments applied to edible insects. Insect species Conditions Main ﬁndings Reference Alphitobius diaperinus  Submergingin hot water  until water temperature reaches 88 /C176C 4.0 log cfu/g reduction in total microbial count; no typical pathogens; aerobic endospore count remainedunaffected and some mycotoxins producing mouldswere identiﬁed(Fombong et al., 2017 ) Tenebrio molitor L.  Submerging for 10 min in boiling water in a 1/12  larvae-water ratioSmall increase in total water content but no signiﬁcant changes in composition of macronutrients(Purschke et al., 2017 ) Tenebrio molitor L.  Submergingfor 1 min in boiling water or sterilized in cans with brine solution  for 16 min at 120/C176C4 log cfu/g and 5 log cfu/g reduction in TVC with boiling and sterilization respectively with no observed yeast or mould in either treatment(Megido et al., 2017 ) Archea domesticus  Submerging in boiling water for 4 min or sterilized in cans with brine solution  for 16 min at120/C176C4 log cfu/g and 5 log cfu/g reduction in TVC with boiling and sterilization respectively with no observed yeast ormould in either treatment Macrotermes spp.  Submerging in boiling water for 1 min 3 log cfu/g reduction in TVC with boiling and no yeast or mould observed with either treatment Cirina gorda  Submerging in boiling water for 5 min 3 log cfu/g reduction in TVC and no yeast or mould observed with either treatment Tenebrio molitor L.  Submerging in boiling water for 3 min in a 1/10  larvae-water ratio, followed by draining for2 min, and excess water removal with absorbentpaperIncrease in water content but no signiﬁcant changes in composition of macronutrients; decrease in luminositycolour factor and no microbiological data presented(Azzollini et al., 2016 ) Tenebrio molitor  a) Submerging in boiled water for 1 min, 10 min, 5 min followed by 24 hr oven-drying at 55 /C176C, or 1 min in acid water  b) Roasting for 10 min whole and crushed larvaeNo signiﬁcant differences in TVC, Enterobacteriaceae and or bacterial spores count with different boilingtreatments; whereas, with roasting, more Enterobacteriaceae were detected both in whole and crushed forms(Klunder et al., 2012 ) Archeta domesticus  a) Submerging in boiling water for 5 min b) Stir-frying for 5 minHigher reductions in TVC with boiling water treatment but no differences in Enterobacteriaceae and bacterial spores counts Brachytrupus sp.  Submerging in boiling water for 5 or 10 min No differences found in TVC, Enterobacteriaceae or bacterial spores counts with the treatments Tenebrio molitor L.  Submerging in boiling water in a 1/10  larvae/ water ratio for 10, 20, or 40 s, followed by chilling in an ice bath for 30 sLonger treatments times were more effective; 5 to 6 log cfu/g reduction in TVC with decrease in Enterobacteriaceae , yeasts and moulds up to non- detectable ranges; no effect on spores count(Vandeweyer et al., 2017 ) Table 3 Potential technological solutions for extraction of insect macromolecule . ValuablecompoundsDry fractionation Wet fractionation Whole insect ﬂour Drying and milling Blanching followed by drying Proteins Fine powder followed by air classiﬁcationPre-treatment (ultrasonic, high pressure, PEF,plasma) followed byenzymatic and chemicalroutes Lipids Dried insect/ﬂour followed by cold press  – depending on lipid contentSupercritical ﬂuid extraction, solvent extraction Chitin Air classiﬁcation Chemical extraction processesS. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 607 Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements The work of the authors was partially supported by different funding sources, i.e., MSCA-IF-2018 - Individual Fellowships  within H2020-EU.1.3.2. - Nurturing excellence by means of cross-border and cross-sector mobility and by funds of the Federal Ministry of Education and Research  based on a decision of the Parliament of the Fed- eral Republic of Germany via the Project Management Jülich  within the joint research project Agrarsysteme der Zukunft: F4F - Nahrung der Zukunft, Teilprojekt I . References Ahuja, K., Mamtani, K., 2020. Edible Insects Market size to exceed $1.5bn by 2026. Global Market Insights Inc. . Alattar, M.A., Alattar, F.N., Popa, R., 2016. Effects of microaerobic fermentation and black soldier ﬂy larvae food scrap processing residues on the growth of corn plants . Plant Sci. Today 3 , 57–62 . Arcluster, 2016. Edible Insects Market . 2016 Analysis and Forecasting Report. In). Azzollini, D., Derossi, A., Fogliano, V., Lakemond, C., Severini, C., 2018. Effects of formulation and process conditions on microstructure, texture and digestibility of extruded insect-riched snacks. Innovative Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 45, 344–353 . Azzollini, D., Derossi, A., Severini, C., 2016. Understanding the drying kinetic and hygroscopic behaviour of larvae of yellow mealworm  and the effects on their quality. J. Insects Food Feed 2 , 233–243 . Bagherzadeh, M., Inamura, M., Jeong, H., 2014. Food waste along the food chain.Bakalis, Seraﬁm, Valdramidis, Vasilis P., Argyropoulos, Dimitrios, Ahrne, Lilia, et al., 2020. How COVID-19 changed our food systems and food security paradigms. Current Research in Food Science 3, 166–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. crfs.2020.05.003 . Berggren, Å., Jansson, A., Low, M., 2019. Approaching ecological sustainability in the emerging insects-as-food industry. Trends Ecol. Evolut. Bulak, P., Proc, K., Pawłowska, M., Kasprzycka, A., Berus, W., Bieganowski, A., 2020. Biogas generation from insects breeding post production wastes. J. Cleaner Prod. 244, 118777. Bußler, S., Rumpold, B.A., Froehling, A., Jander, E., Rawel, H.M., Schlüter, O.K., 2016a. Cold atmospheric pressure plasma processing of insect ﬂour from Tenebrio molitor: impact on microbial load and quality attributes in comparison to dryheat treatment. Innovative Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 36, 277–286 . Bußler, S., Rumpold, B.A., Jander, E., Rawel, H.M., Schlüter, O.K., 2016b. Recovery and techno-functionality of ﬂours and proteins from two edible insect species: meal worm  and black soldier ﬂy  larvae. Heliyon 2,  e00218. Caparros Megido, R., Sablon, L., Geuens, M., Brostaux, Y., Alabi, T., Blecker, C., Drugmand, D., Haubruge, É., Francis, F., 2014. Edible insects acceptance by Belgian consumers: promising attitude for entomophagy development. J. Sens. Stud. 29 , 14–20 . Cheng, J.Y., Chiu, S.L., Lo, I.M., 2017. Effects of moisture content of food waste on residue separation, larval growth and larval survival in black soldier ﬂy bioconversion. Waste Manage. 67, 315–323 . Cortes Ortiz, J.A., Ruiz, A.T., Morales-Ramos, J.A., Thomas, M., Rojas, M.G., Tomberlin, J.K., Yi, L., Han, R., Giroud, L., Jullien, R.L., 2016. Chapter 6 - Insect Mass Production Technologies. In: Dossey, A.T., Morales-Ramos, J.A., Rojas, M.G. , Insects as Sustainable Food Ingredients. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 153–201 . EC, 2009. Regulation  No 1069/2009 of the European parliament. Off. J. European Union. Edjabou, M.E., Petersen, C., Scheutz, C., Astrup, T.F., 2016. Food waste from Danish households: Generation and composition. Waste Manage. 52, 256–268 . FAO, 2011. Global food losses and food waste–Extent, causes and prevention. SAVE FOOD: an Initiative on Food Loss and Waste Reduction. FAO, 2017. The future of food and agriculture. Trends and challenges. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, http://www.fao.org/3/ai6583e. pdf. Fombong, F.T., Van Der Borght, M., Vanden Broeck, J., 2017. Inﬂuence of freeze- drying and oven-drying post blanching on the nutrient composition of the edible insect Ruspolia differens. Insects 8 , 102 . Fowles, T.M., Nansen, C., 2020. Insect-based bioconversion: value from food waste. In: Food Waste Management. Springer, pp. 321–346 . GMI, 2016. Edible Insects Market Size, Share – Global Industry Report 2023. Global market insights industry reports, food, nutrition and animal feed. In).Halloran, A., Hanboonsong, Y., Roos, N., Bruun, S., 2017. Life cycle assessment of cricket farming in north-eastern Thailand. J. Cleaner Prod. 156, 83–94 . Hogsette, J.A., 1992. New diets for production of house ﬂies and stable ﬂies (Diptera: Muscidae) in the laboratory. J. Econ. Entomol. 85 , 2291–2294 . IPIFF, 2019. IPIFF Contribution Paper on the application of insect frass as fertilising product in agriculture. Jucker, C., Lupi, D., Moore, C.D., Leonardi, M.G., Savoldelli, S., 2020. Nutrient Recapture from Insect Farm Waste: Bioconversion with Hermetia illucens  . Sustainability 12 , 362 . Jurgilevich, A., Birge, T., Kentala-Lehtonen, J., Korhonen-Kurki, K., Pietikäinen, J., Saikku, L., Schösler, H., 2016. Transition towards circular economy in the foodsystem. Sustainability 8 , 69 . Kennard, N.J., 2019. Food Waste Management. In: Leal Filho, W., Azul, A.M., Brandli, L., Özuyar, P.G., Wall, T. , Zero Hunger. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 1–17 . Klunder, H., Wolkers-Rooijackers, J., Korpela, J., Nout, M., 2012. Microbiological aspects of processing and storage of edible insects. Food Control 26 , 628– 631. Kranert, M., Hafner, G., Barabosz, J., Schneider, F., Lebersorger, S., Scherhaufer, S., Schuller, H., Leverenz, D., 2012. Determination of Discarded Food and Proposals for a Minimization of Food Wastage in Germany: Abridged Version. University Stuttgart Institute for Sanitary Engineering, Stuttgart, Germany . Kröncke, N., Böschen, V., Woyzichovski, J., Demtröder, S., Benning, R., 2018. Comparison of suitable drying processes for mealworms . Innovative Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 50, 20–25 . L’hocine, L., Boye, J.I., Arcand, Y., 2006. Composition and functional properties of soy protein isolates prepared using alternative defatting and extraction procedures. J. Food Sci. 71 , C137–C145 . Law, Y., Wein, L., 2018. Reversing the nutrient drain through urban insect farming— opportunities and challenges. AIMS Bioeng. 5 , 226–237 . Le Feon, S., Thévenot, A., Maillard, F., Macombe, C., Forteau, L., Aubin, J., 2019. Life Cycle Assessment of ﬁsh fed with insect meal: case study of mealworm inclusion in trout feed, in France. Linder, N., Lindahl, T., Borgström, S., 2018. Using behavioural insights to promote food waste recycling in urban households—Evidence from a longitudinal ﬁeldexperiment. Front. Psychol. 9, 352 . Maina, S., Kachrimanidou, V., Koutinas, A., 2017. A roadmap towards a circular and sustainable bioeconomy through waste valorization. Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem. 8, 18–23 . Manurung, R., Supriatna, A., Esyanthi, R.R., Putra, R.E., 2016. Bioconversion of rice straw waste by black soldier ﬂy larvae : optimal feed rate for biomass production. J Entomol Zool Stud 4 , 1036–1041 . Matthäus, B., Piofczyk, T., Katz, H., Pudel, F., 2019. Renewable resources from insects: exploitation, properties, and reﬁning of fat obtained by cold-pressing from Hermetia illucens  larvae. Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol. 121 , 1800376 . Megido, C., Desmedt, S., Blecker, C., Béra, F., Haubruge, É., Alabi, T., Francis, F., 2017. Microbiological Load of Edible Insects Found in Belgium. Insects 8, 12. In). Megido, R.C., Gierts, C., Blecker, C., Brostaux, Y., Haubruge, É., Alabi, T., Francis, F., 2016. Consumer acceptance of insect-based alternative meat products in Western countries. Food Qual. Prefer. 52, 237–243 . Melgar-Lalanne, G., Hernández-Álvarez, A.-J., Salinas-Castro, A., 2019. Edible insects processing: traditional and innovative technologies. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 18 , 1166–1191 . Mertenat, A., Diener, S., Zurbrügg, C., 2019. Black Soldier Fly biowaste treatment– Assessment of global warming potential. Waste Manage. 84, 173–181 . Milios, L., 2018. Advancing to a Circular Economy: three essential ingredients for a comprehensive policy mix. Sustain. Sci. 13 , 861–878 . Morawicki, R.O., 2011. Handbook of Sustainability for the Food Sciences. John Wiley & Sons . Niassy, S., Fiaboe, K., Affognon, H., Akutse, K., Tanga, M., Ekesi, S., 2016. African indigenous knowledge on edible insects to guide research and policy. J. Insects Food Feed 2 , 161–170 . Oonincx, D.G., De Boer, I.J., 2012. Environmental impact of the production of mealworms as a protein source for humans–a life cycle assessment. PLoS ONE 7 . Poveda, J., Jiménez-Gómez, A., Saati-Santamaría, Z., Usategui-Martín, R., Rivas, R., García-Fraile, P., 2019. Mealworm frass as a potential biofertilizer and abiotic stress tolerance-inductor in plants. Appl. Soil Ecol. 142, 110–122 . Purschke, B., Brüggen, H., Scheibelberger, R., Jäger, H., 2018. Effect of pre-treatment and drying method on physico-chemical properties and dry fractionation behaviour of mealworm larvae . Eur. Food Res. Technol. 244 , 269–280 . Purschke, B., Stegmann, T., Schreiner, M., Jäger, H., 2017. Pilot-scale supercritical CO2 extraction of edible insect oil from Tenebrio molitor L. larvae–Inﬂuence ofextraction conditions on kinetics, defatting performance and compositional properties. Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol. 119 , 1600134 . Roffeis, M., Almeida, J., Wakeﬁeld, M.E., Valada, T.R.A., Devic, E., Koné, N.G., Kenis, M., Nacambo, S., Fitches, E.C., Koko, G.K., 2017. Life cycle inventory analysis of prospective insect based feed production in West Africa. Sustainability 9 ,1697 . Sakai, S.-I., Yoshida, H., Hirai, Y., Asari, M., Takigami, H., Takahashi, S., Tomoda, K., Peeler, M.V., Wejchert, J., Schmid-Unterseh, T., 2011. International comparative study of 3R and waste management policy developments. J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manage. 13 , 86–102 .S. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 608 Salomone, R., Saija, G., Mondello, G., Giannetto, A., Fasulo, S., Savastano, D., 2017. Environmental impact of food waste bioconversion by insects: application of life cycle assessment to process using Hermetia illucens. J. Cleaner Prod. 140, 890–905 . Sheppard, D.C., Newton, G.L., Thompson, S.A., Savage, S., 1994. A value added manure management system using the black soldier ﬂy. Bioresour. Technol. 50, 275–279 . Smetana, S., Mathys, A., Knoch, A., Heinz, V., 2015. Meat alternatives: life cycle assessment of most known meat substitutes. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 20 , 1254–1267 . Smetana, S., Schmitt, E., Mathys, A., 2019. Sustainable use of Hermetia illucens insect biomass for feed and food: attributional and consequential life cycle assessment. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 144, 285–296 . Soetemans, L., Uyttebroek, M., D’Hondt, E., Bastiaens, L., 2019. Use of organic acids to improve fractionation of the black soldier ﬂy larvae juice into lipid-and protein-enriched fractions. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 245 , 2257–2267 . Sogari, G., Amato, M., Biasato, I., Chiesa, S., Gasco, L., 2019. The potential role of insects as feed: a multi-perspective review. Animals 9 , 119 . Spranghers, T., Ottoboni, M., Klootwijk, C., Ovyn, A., Deboosere, S., De Meulenaer, B., Michiels, J., Eeckhout, M., De Clercq, P., De Smet, S., 2017. Nutritional composition of black soldier ﬂy  prepupae reared on different organic waste substrates. J. Sci. Food Agric. 97 , 2594–2600 . Stenmarck, Å., Jensen, C., Quested, T., & Moates, G., 2016. Estimates of European food waste levels . Stockholm, Sweden. Thévenot, A., Rivera, J.L., Wilfart, A., Maillard, F., Hassouna, M., Senga-Kiesse, T., Le Féon, S., Aubin, J., 2018. Mealworm meal for animal feed: environmental assessment and sensitivity analysis to guide future prospects. J. Cleaner Prod.170, 1260–1267 .Thi, N.B.D., Kumar, G., Lin, C.-Y., 2015. An overview of food waste management in developing countries: current status and future perspective. J. Environ. Manage. 157, 220–229 . Tiwari, B.K., 2015. Ultrasound: A clean, green extraction technology. TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 71, 100–109 . van Huis, A., Oonincx, D.G., 2017. The environmental sustainability of insects as food and feed. A review. Agron. Sustainable Develop. 37 , 43 . Van Huis, A., Van Itterbeeck, J., Klunder, H., Mertens, E., Halloran, A., Muir, G., Vantomme, P., 2013. Edible insects: future prospects for food and feed security. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . van Zanten, H.H., Mollenhorst, H., Oonincx, D.G., Bikker, P., Meerburg, B.G., de Boer, I.J., 2015. From environmental nuisance to environmental opportunity: houseﬂy larvae convert waste to livestock feed. J. Cleaner Prod. 102, 362–369 . Vandeweyer, D., Lenaerts, S., Callens, A., Van Campenhout, L., 2017. Effect of blanching followed by refrigerated storage or industrial microwave drying on the microbial load of yellow mealworm larvae . Food Control 71, 311–314 . Vantomme, P., Mertens, E., Van Huis, A., Klunder, H., 2012. Summary report of the technical consultation meeting‘‘ Assessing the Potential of Insects as Food and Feed in assuring Food Security. FAO, Rome. Wang, H., ur Rehman, K., Liu, X., Yang, Q., Zheng, L., Li, W., Cai, M., Li, Q., Zhang, J., Yu, Z., 2017. Insect bioreﬁnery: a green approach for conversion of crop residues into biodiesel and protein. Biotechnol. Biofuels 10 , 304 . Wunderlich, S.M., Martinez, N.M., 2018. Conserving natural resources through food loss reduction: production and consumption stages of the food supply chain. Int. Soil Water Conserv. Res. 6 , 331–339 . Zheng, L., Hou, Y., Li, W., Yang, S., Li, Q., Yu, Z., 2013. Exploring the potential of grease from yellow mealworm beetle  as a novel biodieselfeedstock. Appl. Energy 101, 618–621 .S. Ojha et al. Waste Management 118  600–609 609 

