Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Resources, Conservation & Recycling journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/resconrec Full length article Waste prevention, energy recovery or recycling - Directions for household food waste management in light of circular economy policy Irmeline de Sadeleera,b,⁎, Helge Brattebøa, Pieter Callewaertb aIndustrial Ecology Programme, The Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway bOstfold Research, Stadion 4, 1671 Kråkerøy, Norway ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Organic waste treatmentFood waste preventionRecycling rates Energy e ﬃciency Avoided greenhouse gas emissionsABSTRACT Waste amounts are growing with increasing wealth and population. To curb this trend and reduce adverse environmental impacts, food waste reduction has been sat on the political agenda, together with ambitious material recycling and greenhouse gas  emissions targets. This study analyses the environmental bene ﬁts of two waste management systems for household organic food waste, namely recycling by anaerobic digestion  and incineration. Recycling rates, energy eﬃciency andGHG emissions are reviewed to determine the environmental pro ﬁle of the downstream systems. The avoided GHG emissions achieved by the respective waste management strategies are further compared with the ones achieved by food waste prevention strategies. The study combines a material ﬂow analysis  assessing the downstream system with published life cycle analysis  results for the upstream system. The method wasdemonstrated as a proof-of-concept case study for the city of Trondheim, Norway. It was found that the recycling of food waste with AD performs better in terms of recycling rates and GHG emissions than incineration, provided that diesel is substituted by biogas. However, the energy eﬃciency of the incineration process was found to be slightly higher than of the AD option. Nonetheless, relatively small re- ductions in food wastage  resulted in large amounts of avoided emissions, outweighing thebeneﬁts of recycling strategies. For mitigating climate change, the prevention of food waste clearly stood out as the most eﬀ ective strategy. Norwegian authorities should focus equally much on household food waste pre- vention than on optimising food waste management systems. 1. Introduction The European Union's approach to waste management is currently based on two main pillars. On the one hand, the Waste Framework Directive  favours waste prevention over reuse, followed by recycling, energy recovery and ﬁnally disposal . On the other hand, the Circular Economy package adopted by European Commission in 2015 advocates an economic system thatleaves no waste to be land ﬁlled and that keeps all material ﬂows in the economy through reuse, redesign, material recovery or energy recovery. Two main elements are in- troduced: the land ﬁll ban on speci ﬁc waste fractions such as organic waste, and speci ﬁc collection and recycling targets for the various waste fractions. Several European cities have in the context of a circular economy recently implemented source sorting of household organic waste, as thisfraction contains high energy and nutrient levels and has a high po-tential for recovery. Environmental and economic bene ﬁts have hence led European authorities to focus on organic waste recycling and tolargely invest in biogas facilities, resulting in Europe now being the world's leading producer of biogas (Hamilton et al., 2015; Scarlat et al. 2018). Anaerobic digestion  converts waste into biogas and di- gestate, which can be used to produce electricity, heat, fuel and soil amendment products ( Bernstad and la Cour Jansen, 2011 ,2012; Bernstad Saraiva Schott and Andersson, 2015; Khalid, Arshad, Anjum, Mahmood, and Dawson, 2011; Modahl et al., 2016; Scarlat, 2018). Previous studies have concluded that AD as waste management optionresults in net environmental bene ﬁts when compared to incineration, composting and land ﬁlling ( Bernstad and Andersson, 2015; Edwards, Othman, Crossin, and Burn, 2017 ;Evangelisti, Lettieri, Borello, and Clift, 2014 ;Khoo, Lim, and Tan, 2010; Raadal, Stensgård, Lyng, and Hanssen, 2016). In general, biogas-based energy systems release lower amounts of greenhouse gas  emissions than fossil- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104908 Received 13 June 2019; Received in revised form 21 April 2020; Accepted 23 April 2020⁎Corresponding author. E-mail address: ids@ostfoldforskning.no .Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 0921-3449/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. T based energy systems, especially when biogas substitutes fuel in transportation (Niu et al., 2013; Lozanovski et al., 2014; Lyng et al., 2015). The environmental bene ﬁts, however, depend on technology choices, the substituted products, the impact categories analysed andthe area under study ( Bernstad and la Cour Jansen, 2011 ,2012; Modahl et al., 2016 ). Even though waste prevention is a top priority in the European waste policy, reducing food waste has only lately been recognized as apriority area both at an international, European and Norwegian level. Sustainable Development Goal  number 12.3 sat the topic on the agenda in 2015 by aiming at “halving per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along the pro-duction and supply chains, including post-harvest losses ”. In Europe, food waste reduction has become one of the priority areas in theCircular Economy package adopted in 2015. In Norway, an agreement between the government and the food industry was concluded in June 2017, aiming at reducing food waste by 50% by 2030 (Klima og miljødepartementet, 2017). These resolutions are of importance as food waste is in fact a huge challenge. Approximately one third of the food produced worldwide is wasted throughout the supply chain, representing loss of resources consumed, such as water, land, energy and labour . 12% of the total Norwegian household food consumption is wasted, of which two thirds are avoidable food products ( Bernstad and Andersson, 2015 ;Bjørnerud and Syversen, 2017 ;Syversen, Hanssen, and Bratland, 2018 ). Vanham, Bouraoui, Leip, Grizzetti, and Bidoglio  estimated that as much as 80% the European food waste can be classi ﬁed as avoidable. Food waste hence indirectly causes large environmental damages, inaddition to the direct impacts of waste treatment at disposal, and therefore give rise to ethical, social and economic concerns. The pre- vention of food waste can remedy to several of these aspects ( Eberle and Fels, 2016; Salhofer, Obersteiner, Schneider, and Lebersorger, 2008 ; UNEP, 2016), however, prevention measures have until now receivedfar less attention than waste treatment and recovery measures. Few previous studies have compared the environmental bene ﬁts of food waste prevention with the ones of various waste handling solu- tions for several indicators. This comparison has been partly covered by Bernstad and Andersson  , who concluded based on LCA metho- dology that food waste minimization strategies result in far greaterbeneﬁts for global warming compared to both incineration and AD. This supports the conclusions presented by Matsuda, Yano, Hirai, and Sakai  . Further, Hamilton et al.  concluded using MFA methodology that food waste minimization strategies result in greaterenergy saving potential compared to food waste recycling strategies. There is little literature on this topic, and since the Circular Economy package seems to focus mostly on recovery and recycling strategies, while the waste hierarchy and overall policy should give highest priority to prevention, this limited knowledge is seen as a problem. This study aims at analysing the performance of these two re- spective strategies (transition to a circular economy and waste pre- vention) for the case of food waste based on three relevant indicators in the light of CE: recycling rates, energy e ﬃciency and generated/ avoided GHG emissions. For capturing these three indicators which areclosely interlinked, we use a multi-layer MFA framework to model the waste management system. The upstream  en- vironmental impacts and downstream  impacts are linked by mass balance principles and CO 2calculations by coupling the MFA results with LCA literature for assessing the avoidedemissions indicator. The methodology is demonstrated by a proof-of-concept study for the city of Trondheim, representing a typical Norwegian city. The functional unit is based on a food waste composition analysis for this city. The conclusions drawn from this study can be applied to other European cities facing the same waste management situation.2. Methodology This study aims at analysing the performance of two respective strategies: the transition to a circular economy and waste prevention for the case of food waste based on three relevant indicators. For doing so, the downstream and upstream systems are modelled separately. The downstream model is developed using material ﬂow analysis  methodology extended with energy and emission data for assessingrecycling rates, energy e ﬃciencies and emission levels for two di ﬀerent recycling systems. The upstream model calculates CO 2emission from the food production system, using data from LCA studies in literature. Both models are tailored to ﬁt the current food waste situation and the actual plans for the city of Trondheim, with the 2017 system as re-ference and alternative scenarios in 2020 and 2025 as comparisons. This methodology is a proof-of-concept. The full MFA model is pre- sented in S.I. Diﬀerent de ﬁnitions and terms are found in literature when it comes to food wastage. These should be deﬁ ned precisely as they are used in this paper to avoid any confusion. Note that neither the de ﬁnitions nor the scope of the study does not include packaging. Food waste is any food, and inedible parts of food, removed from the food supply chain to be recovered or disposed (including com- posted, crops ploughed in/not harvested, anaerobic digestion, bio- energy production, co-generation, incineration, disposal to sewer, landﬁll or discarded to sea) . Avoidable food waste refers to materials that could have been eaten, making no distinction between what is elsewhere called “possibly avoidable ”or“preference loss ”. Moreover, food which has passed its by-use date is also considered as avoidable, as the consumer could have planned more e ﬀectively ( Östergren et al., 2014). Unavoidable food waste refers to materials that could not have been eaten under normal circumstances, for instance bones and orange peels . Food waste prevention are measures taken before a substance, ma- terial or product has become waste, that reduce:  the quantity of waste, including through the re-use of products or the extension of the life span of products;  the adverse impacts of the generated waste on the environment and human health; or  the content of harmful substances in materials and products . 2.1. Case study description As of 2017, Trondheim had ca 191 000 inhabitants , plus some 10– 15 000 students with another formal home address, and is thereby the third largest city in Norway. A large share of the waste is today incinerated, with heat recovery feeding into a district heat net- work that serves 30% of the space heating demand of the city's build- ings. This provides annually some 600 GWh heat supply of which ca 80% energy from waste and the remaining 20% from peak load energy sources ( Brattebø and Reenaas, 2012; Lausselet et al., 2016; Varme, 2017 ). Currently, paper, plastic, glass, metal, and residual waste are the fractions sorted out from households. There are three main collection technologies: surface bins represent the bins on wheel that are placed in front of each household; underground receptacles represent containers usually placed at a central point in an urban area and serve multiple households; and vacuum systems that are either stationary or mobile. These currently collect 83%, 12%, and 5% of the household waste re-spectively. The two latter technologies are underground systems, which together aim at reaching a collection capacity of 50% by 2030. Hence, organic waste is currently not sorted out or treated independently but is sent to incineration in the residual waste fraction. The city adminis- tration, however, today investigates the possibilities for building a central sorting facility, including the use of near infrared technology,I. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 2 aimed at sorting out organic waste for biogas production and plastic waste for increased ratios of material recycling . 2.2. Data acquisition A composition analysis was conducted to estimate the avoidable food waste amounts contained in household waste in Trondheim. Wastesamples of 400– 500 kg from ﬁve diﬀerent residential areas were col- lected, re ﬂecting the social-demographic di ﬀerences of the city. This was important as it has been shown that the food waste amounts di ﬀer with factors such as age, sex, wages and time consumption on foodpreparation . The residual waste was ﬁrst divided into non-food waste and food waste. The food waste was subsequently categorized as avoidable and unavoidable, as recommended by Lebersorger and Schneider  andBernstad and Cànovas  . Eight avoidable fractions were dis- tinguished: fruits and vegetables, bread and bakeries, ﬁsh, meat, dairy products, eggs, meal leftovers, and other usable products, as advocated by the Norwegian national handbook for composition analyses . For three of the sampling areas, the meal leftover fraction was further classiﬁed into the categories of bread, ﬁsh and meat, and others in order to get an indication of the amounts of carbon-intensive products presentin that speci ﬁc fraction. A composition vector was developed based on the average of the 5 areas, representing the share of unavoidable and avoidable and food waste fractions divided on the speci ﬁc fractions . Based on weight, the meal leftover fraction was found to be the most importantfraction  of avoidable food waste, followed by fruits and vege- tables  and bread and pastries . However, the uncertainties linked to the analysis are likely to be signiﬁcant due to errors that occurred during the out-sorting process. As the results are based on the fraction weight, incorrect out-sorting ofheavy products or the inclusion of packaging in ﬂuence the results. Nonetheless, the results are comparable to the ones presented in theliterature and therefore considered acceptable for the purpose of this study. Bernstad and Casanovas  present a graph compiling the available food waste fractions results across the literature. It is di ﬃcult to compare in detail the di ﬀerent studies, as the classi ﬁcation of the food fractions di ﬀer across the studies, a ﬀecting the percentage-based results. However, the fruits and vegetable share nearly always the lar-gest, most often followed by bread and pastries and/or prepared food. In some studies, the categories “diary ”and “others ”were also sig- niﬁcant. The study of Stensgård and Hanssen  was  not included in that overview, but the division of the categories and hence the results are comparable to this study. Their result present that the meal leftover fraction was the most important fraction  of the avoidable food waste, followed by fruits and vegetables  and bread . Understanding the composition of the food waste is a ﬁrst step for proposing targeted and e ﬃcient reduction solutions.2.3. Downstream system The system boundaries are two-fold: the upstream and the down- stream system . The ﬁrst one, representing the food production system, is described in 2.4.1. The system boundaries of the downstreamsystem include the municipal household waste system for managing organic waste. The system boundaries start with the collection of waste from the households. The waste is transported either directly to the incineration facility or to a central sorting facility. In the second option, the waste is, after further sorting in the central sorting facility, either directed to a biogas facility or to the incineration plant. The incinera- tion process produces heat which is used for district heating purposes and ashes which are disposed of. The biological treatment produces biogas which is used as fuel, and digestate which is used as fertilizers as it recovers nitrogen and phosphorus. 2.3.1. System boundary description . 2.3.2. Model description . 2.4. Upstream system Following the MFA modelling principles of Brunner and Rechberger  , the model “A generic municipal solid waste man- agement model ”developed at NTNU  was adapted and applied to the organic waste system of the municipality of Trond- heim . The mass-balanced mathematical model analyses the resource and emission ﬂows in the system, using three di ﬀerent system ﬂow layers for this system de ﬁnition. First, a material layer quanti ﬁes the annual ﬂows of goods  in the system. Second, an energy layer evaluates the associated ﬂows of energy for each process in the system. Finally, an emission layer estimates GHG emissions (as CO 2- eq) from processes, transport and energy consumption. Due to the de-pendency between the layers, it is possible to examine how changes in the material ﬂows, as a consequence of system changes over time, will inﬂuence the system-wide energy and emission performance. Theﬁrst layer calculates all material ﬂows based on given waste ﬂows quantities, on the composition vector and on known or assumed transfer coe ﬃcients for each process. A transfer coe ﬃcient in MFA theory determines how much of the sum of in ﬂows to a given process is directed to a speci ﬁc outﬂow direction. Transfer coe ﬃcients hence tell how e ﬃcient a process is in directing the waste through ﬂow in the desired downstream direction. The calculated material ﬂows are used to estimate the energy ﬂows entering and leaving the system. The energy e ﬃciency of the system is calculated by dividing the energy generated in incineration and biogasproduction with the feedstock energy from the waste and the con- sumption of energy from waste treatment processes and transport ac- tivities. This is used as an indicator for assessing the overall energy performance of the system. The emission layer calculates the generated GHG emissions based on the results from the material and energy layer. The emissions in- cluded are caused by waste collection and transport, energy consump- tion during waste treatment processes and direct emissions from AD and incineration. Emissions caused by the life cycle of infrastructure are excluded. The emission factors are presented in S.I. Additionally, avoided emissions are calculated based on the quan- tity of energy outputs calculated in the energy layer of the model. Onthe one hand, heat generated from the incineration process is assumed to replace electricity as heating source in households, thanks to district heating in Trondheim. On the other hand, biogas from the AD is as- sumed to substitute diesel in transport. For the substituted products, the amounts of energy generated are multiplied with the emission factors ofTable 1 Composition vector of the reference scenario 2017. Waste fractions Waste composition kg/cap % Bread and pastries 8,61 14% Fruits and vegetables 10,05 16% Meat 3,48 6% Fish 0,85 1% Dairy 2,54 4% Other usable products 3,87 6% Eggs 0,16 0% Meal leftovers 11,59 19% Unavoidable food waste 20,07 33% Total 61,21 100%I. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 3 electricity  and diesel (0,273 kgCO 2eq/kWh, ecoinvent 2), representing avoided emissions and therefore with negative values. 2.4.1. System boundary description Both the food supply chain and the waste management system are essential in the environmental assessment of food waste prevention . The upstream system, depicting the food supply chain, quanti ﬁes the embedded emissions of food commodities in a cradle-to-gate perspective. The system boundaries of the upstream system follow the ones of Clune et al., 2017 ,Fig. 2. At the farm, inputs from chemicals and fertilizers, fuel and energyinputs from irrigation and machinery for cultivation, harvesting and processing are included. In addition, transport and distribution to the regional distribution centre are part of the analysis. Outputs include emissions released from fertilized soils, plants and animals on the ﬁelds. The infrastructure, however, is not included. It should be noted that the use phase which includes how consumers travel to shops, store and cook food is not included in the analysis. Infact, the aim of the study is to quantify the impacts of di ﬀerent political strategies which are out of reach for consumers. If a share of theavoidable food waste is properly prevented from being wasted at the household level, it can be assumed that the in ﬂow of food commodities to the household is equally reduced. Consequently, it can be consideredthat the same amount of food commodities is avoided from being produced, and that the associated production-related emissions are Fig. 1. Food chain system divided on upstream and downstream systems. Fig. 2. System boundaries of the upstream system. Source: Clune et al., 2017 .I. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 4 avoided simultaneously. This analysis hence neglects the environmental impacts arising at the household level. 2.4.2. Model description Clune et al., 2017 performed a meta-analysis of 369 LCA studies published between 2000 and 2015, from which they created a GHG emission database for a large quantity of food products. In this study, the embedded GHG emissions of the di ﬀerent avoidable food waste fractions were calculated  by aggregating the median GWP values of the appropriate food products presented by Clune et al., 2017. The emissions were then multiplied with the composition vector in percent, giving the amount of CO 2eq embedded in one kilo of avoidable food waste with the typical composition of the food wasted by house-holds in Trondheim. This composition was used as reference composi- tion. It is unlikely, however, that all food fractions will be equally re- duced by prevention measures. The change within the various fractions therefore follows the results of the ForMat project ( Stensgård and Hanssen, 2015 ). Two composition analyses were conducted in an in- terval of 5 years in the Norwegian city of Fredrikstad and in the Hal- lingdal valley. During this period, food waste prevention measures were actively established. The di ﬀerence in food wastage between the two analyses was concluded to be a consequence of these measures. Thechange in shares within the composition vector in the various projec- tions is subject to high uncertainty, but is the only available data in a Norwegian waste prevention context. Table 2 presents the new com- position vector e ﬀected by food waste prevention measures. The production of the unavoidable food waste fraction is equal for all scenarios and projections and was therefore left out of this study, assuggested by Martinez-Sanchez, Tonini, Møller, and Astrup  . Following the same approach as Bernstad and Andersson  , only the avoidable food waste is prevented. For calculating the embedded emissions from the meal leftover fraction, its composition had to be estimated. During the composition analysis, the meal leftovers were classiﬁed in three categories: bread, ﬁsh and meat, and others. Based on the fraction weight, it was estimated that 15% of the meal leftover wasconstituted of bread and pastries, 15% of ﬁsh and meat, and 70% of a mixture of all other fractions, mainly others and fruits and vegetables.The amount of embedded GHG emissions of this fraction was estimated in accordance with this allotment. The emissions embedded in one kilo of avoidable food waste with the reference composition amounted to 3.44 kg CO 2eq/kg avoidable wasted food. In comparison, the emissions released for producing onekilo of avoidable food waste with the prevention composition amountedto 3.88 kg CO 2eq/kg avoidable wasted food. These results are in line with the literature .The di ﬀerence be- tween these two values, i.e. 0.44 kg CO 2eq/kg, represents the change in upstream emissions if the waste composition is altered through pre-vention activities. It can be noted that the embedded emissions of one kilo avoidable food waste increase as the amounts of avoidable food waste is reduced, which is explained by a reduction of the low-carbonintensive product share  but a stagnation in the high carbon-intensive product share . 2.5. Scenario development This study compares 3 main scenarios for the years 2017, 2020 and 2025: a Reference scenario , a Central sorting scenario  and aPrevention scenario . Reference scenario  - describes the current waste management solutions in Trondheim in 2017 and assumes these solutions are used towards 2025. Organic waste is collected together with the residual waste and sent to incineration for district heating. Projections for 2020 and 2025 account for increased population and thereby increased food waste amounts. The share of collection technologies is adjusted with time, with above-ground bins decreasing to 80% and 70% for the 2020 and 2025 projections respectively, and the underground receptacles and vacuum systems increasing to 14% and 20%, and to 6% and 10%, respectively. The collection technology inﬂ uences the energy require- ment of the collection process. The share of biodiesel used in transportis assumed to rise to 15% in 2020, and to 50% in 2025. The LHV of food waste is estimated at 2500 kJ/kg for fruits and vegetables, 9200 kJ/kg forﬁsh and meat  and 4150 kJ/kg for all other fractions . The amount of organic waste per in- habitant was calculated based on historic organic waste generation data from 2007, 2012 and 2015, which show a slight increase over the years. A linear regression was applied and lead to the following: 61.21 kg in 2017, 68 kg in 2020 and 71.7 kg in 2025, which were used as reference scenarios for the di ﬀerent years. Central sorting scenario  –examines the e ﬀects of a new central sorting facility separating organic waste and di ﬀerent plastic waste fractions with optical sorting and near-infrared technologies. Central sorting facilities are promoted as important technological tools for increasing collection and hence recycling rates. Variants of this technology are currently spreading as state-of-the-art waste manage- ment practice in Norway and is therefore of importance to examine more closely. Based on data from a similar facility at ROAF outside Oslo, the organic waste separation e ﬃciency of the facility is set to 50%, which re ﬂects the performance of the currently existing tech- nologies . Half of the household food waste is thus directed to the incineration plant together with other waste fractions,while the successfully out-sorted second half is sent to AD for biogas production in Verdal, 95 km outside Trondheim. The methane yield of food waste is assumed to be 153 Nm3/t . Ac- cording to the city's plans, the central sorting facility will not be inoperation before 2025 and is therefore only modelled for this year. The collection technologies, the share of transport fuel and the LHV of the food waste fractions are equal to those assumptions used in the RS scenario. Prevention scenario  –investigates the consequences of pre- vention measures, which decrease the amounts of avoidable food waste in 2017, 2020 and 2025 with 10%, 15% and 30% respectively. The measures themselves are not deﬁ ned, only the e ﬀects of reduced avoidable food waste amounts are analysed. These e ﬀects of prevention are applied also to the CS scenarios, in a combined PS+CS scenario. The collection technologies, the share of transport fuel and the LHV of the food waste fractions are equal to the assumptions used in the RS scenario. Like for the reference scenarios, the amount of organic waste per inhabitant for the prevention scenarios were calculated based on historical data on which a linear regression was applied. This lead to the following: 56.91 kg in 2017 including 10% reduction, 61.11 kg in 2020 including 15% reduction and 57.27 kg in 2025 including 30% reduc- tion. 2.6. Sensitivity analysis A sensitivity analysis is used for assessing the robustness of certainTable 2 Composition vector a ﬀected by food waste prevention measures. Waste fractions Waste composition kg/cap % Bread and pastries 2,67 7% Fruits and vegetables 10,05 27% Meat 3,24 9% Fish 0,79 2% Dairy 2,44 7% Other usable products 2,79 8% Eggs 0,16 0% Meal leftovers 14,72 40% Total 36,85 100%I. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 5 parameters, and thereby their in ﬂuence on the system variables. Input variables and assumptions are deliberately changed one at a time to analyse how they a ﬀect the outcome of the modelling. The changes in results are measured through the sensitivity ratio  which is thefraction of relative change in the results  over the relative change in the input parameter  . =SRRR PPΔ/0 Δ/0p The sensitivity analysis was only performed on the main parameters of the MFA system, in ﬂuencing the three layers. The analysis was performed for the CS scenario of 2025 as this would allow a comparisonof the parameters in ﬂuencing both the AD and the incineration pro- cesses. 3. Results The results are three-fold according to the three assessed indicators: material recycling, energy e ﬃciency, and emission levels. Regarding recycling rates, there is a common understanding in the EU that these must be increased in a circular economy. In addition to producing biogas, a biogas facility also creates biorest which recycles nitrogen and phosphorus. The analysed biogas facility uses a dewa- tering system, which leads to the nitrogen leaving the biorest stream. Only phosphorus is then recycled as fertilizer. However, the biogas facility under study has done tests regarding the use of liquid biorest, which would allow a recovery of the nitrogen in addition to the re-covery of phosphorus . Regardless of the amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus recycled, the European Commission de ﬁnes in the waste legislation that all inputs to the AD facility are considered “material recycled if the digestate is used as fertilizer in agriculture ”. This means that the scenarios using AD obtain increased recycling rates compared to theRS, as long as the digestate is used as fertilizers. As a result, CS and PS+CS scenarios reach 50% material recycling for the food waste fraction on the account that half of the waste is treated with AD. In comparison, the RS scenario obtains no material recycling as the total waste amounts are incinerated. The net energy generation for the three scenarios at all points in time are presented in Fig. 3, together with the disaggregated con- sumption and generation factors. The net generation  isthe result of the energy generated as biogas and district heating (green bars) minus the energy consumption in transport and processing (blue bars). Given increased waste amounts, the energy consumption and gen- eration are slightly increased over time. Not surprisingly, the preven- tion scenario at all times displays lower e ﬃciencies compared to the RS scenarios because reduced waste amounts lead to reductions in con-sumed and recovered energy. For all scenarios except the CS scenario, the process energy con- sumption is largely dominant over the transport energy consumption. It is higher in the CS scenario because of the long transport distances to the biogas facility. Even if AD is capable of recovering slightly higher energy amounts than incineration (CS and PS+CS scenarios compared to the RS and PS in 2025), the net energy generation is slightly decreased due to the long transport distances. The amounts of generated and avoided emissions are presented in Fig. 4 for the three scenarios at all points in time. The bars on the upper side of the graph present the amounts of generated emissions, whereasthe bars on the lower side represent the avoided emissions. The PS 2025 scenario and the PS+CS scenario clearly demonstrates the largest amounts of avoided emissions across all scenarios. Theprevention of food waste  has undoubtedly the highest impact as climate mitigation strategy. The substitution of diesel with biogas  also leads toavoided emissions, as does the substitution of electricity with district heating  although to a lesser extent. As diesel has a much higher emission factor than electricity, its substitution highly increases the amounts of avoided emissions. Nonetheless, both sub- stitution options result in far less avoided emissions than the prevention of food waste. The bene ﬁts of fertilizer substitution with digestate was neglected. The avoided emissions outweigh the generated emissions in all scenarios, except in the current PS scenario. This latter is explained bythe fact that the composition of the food waste arising with the inﬂ u- ence of prevention measures include more carbon-intensive products.The prevention activities in the current RS are hence resulting in higher levels of GHG emissions, as the change in the share of fractions out- weighs the bene ﬁts of 10% reduction in waste amounts. The amounts of generated emissions are higher in the CS and PS +CS scenarios due to the increase of transport related emissions  compared to the RS and the PS scenarios. Only small emissions are released by the incineration process  and the recycling process . To analyse the robustness of the results, a sensitivity analysis was conducted for the most important parameters ( Table  3). The food waste separation e ﬃciency of the central sorting facility was analysed in terms of how it in ﬂuences the system recycling and energy e ﬃciencies. As expected, an e ﬃcient food waste out-sorting in the central sorting facility is crucial for improving the system recycling e ﬃciency. How- ever, it turns out to only slightly in ﬂuence  the system energy eﬃciency. The energy e ﬃciency is in fact much more in ﬂuenced by changes in the methane yield and the LHV of “other food waste frac- tions ”. Regarding emission levels, the emission factor for diesel used in transport was found to be very sensitive, as most of the waste truck ﬂeet is fuelled on diesel. 4. Discussion This chapter ﬁrst discusses the results and assumptions used in the study. Second, the limitations of the methodology are reviewed. The system boundaries in this study exclude the household level, with storage in refrigerators and food preparation. As the meal leftover fraction stands for the largest share of avoidable food waste, its pre- vention would also in ﬂuence the amount of energy consumed. Further, the study did not account for the rebound e ﬀect. As households spend less on food when food waste is prevented, the environmental impacts might be reallocated with spending on other products. This aspect should be taken into account for a holistic environmental policy de- velopment. Comparing avoided emissions from improved waste management systems with the ones obtained from food waste prevention o ﬀer in- sights in the environmental potential of upstream versus downstreamclimate change mitigation strategies. In that regard, prevention strate- gies clearly result in larger bene ﬁts than recycling strategies. 30% re- duction in avoidable food waste gave more than 5 times larger bene ﬁts than what was obtained with improved recycling strategies in the CS scenario. It must be noted that these conclusions are based on the as- sumption that a reduction in food waste leads to a reduction of food production. Avoided emission from the food production process was hence the determining factor for the overall bene ﬁts of food waste prevention, as observed also by Bernstad and Andersson  ; Gentil, Gallo, and Christensen  andMatsuda et al.  . There is however a risk that the amount of food waste prevented at thehousehold level will arise higher up in the food chain, e.g. at the retailor production level. Such a shift in waste production will hence not prevent any GHG emissions –it is then necessary to have good waste management recycling systems in place, and therefrom avoid emissionsthrough substituting carbon intensive products. Combining prevention measures and a switch to AD would, none- theless, o ﬀer optimal solutions for food waste management based onI. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 6 the analysed indicators. It must be noted that the AD process depends on food waste as feedstock. Investing in a biogas facility will create amarket for the food waste and might therefore not incentivize the prevention and reduction of food waste at the household level. Further, analysing the di ﬀerences between the RS 2025 and CS 2025 scenarios, excluding the upstream prevention results, allows for a comparison of the performance of the household food wastemanagement systems for the three assessed indicators. First, in accordance with the de ﬁnition of the EU , AD is the only treatment option re- sulting in material recycling. The sensitivity analysis disclosed that theeﬀectiveness of the central sorting facility is a crucial parameter, highly aﬀecting the recycling rate. Optionally, organic waste can be collected in separate bins and directly transported to a biogas facility, avoiding Fig. 3. Energy consumption, generation and net energy consumption for all scenarios. Fig. 4. Total emissions generated and avoided in kg CO 2eq for all scenarios.I. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 7 the diversion through a central sorting facility. Based on the experi- ences from ROAF, this would reduce the contamination of the other waste fractions, especially paper and plastics, allowing for overall higher recycling rates . Second, it is bene ﬁcial to recover the feedstock energy present in food waste, as the generated energy amounts largely outweigh con- sumed energy across all scenarios. Even though the AD process gen- erates slightly more energy than the incineration process, the CS sce- nario requires higher energy amounts because of the longer driving distance to the biogas facility, causing the total energy e ﬃciency to decrease. The LHV, and especially the methane yield, were found to bequite sensitive parameters. The latter was assumed to be slightly overestimated , which might have given too high energy amounts generated for the AD process. However, the biogasfacility in the case study operates with co-digestion: a feedstock mix consisting of sewage sludge, organic household waste and ﬁsh sludge. This mix delivers higher amounts of biogas than if only organic wastewas used as input . Therefore, the methane yield in use is higher than if only food waste would have been digested. Inaddition, it should be taken into account that the energy recovery from incineration can easily be connected to a heat or electricity grid. In comparison, biogas and fertilizers from digestate are not necessarily convenient to use without any infrastructural changes and due to pre- mature markets or policy constraints. This might lead to the results of the study being more theoretical than practically implementable. Third, when comparing generated emissions with avoided emis- sions, it is clear that the avoided emissions outweigh the generated onesin all scenarios. Nonetheless, the net bene ﬁt of the CS scenario is 5 times greater than of the RS scenario. From an emission perspective, itis hence bene ﬁcial to treat food waste by AD rather than by incinera- tion, even though the generated emissions are larger in the CS scenario.It can be concluded that substituting diesel is more advantageous than substituting electricity. It must be noted that the Norwegian electricity mix was applied, in ﬂuencing the results by its low carbon-intensity. This assumption in ﬂuences the di ﬀerence between the scenario results more than it would if the Nordic or European electricity mix had been applied. In addition, the sensitivity analysis disclosed that both the emission factors for diesel and electricity were in ﬂuential, especially the latter one, which might also contribute to overestimate the lowemissions of the CS scenario. Additionally, the avoided emissions of the CS scenario would have been increased if the substation of fertilizers with digestate had been included. The emission factor for diesel is rather in ﬂuential on overall emis- sion results. This can explain the high values of the transport process in the CS scenario, where driving distance is decisive. An option for re- ducing the consumed energy amounts would be to either have a nearer location of the AD facility, to fuel the trucks entirely on biogas or an- other type of carbon neutral fuel, or to transport the waste by train. The methodology in use has clear limitations. The presented MFA model is more appropriate for modelling complex waste management systems with several waste fractions. The downstream indicators giverelatively straightforward results for the analysed scenarios, but thelinks between them are not always obvious. The MFA system con- sistently allows analysing these trade-o ﬀs, but is not used to its full potential when applied to this simpli ﬁed system. In addition, the analysis would have been strengthened by a cost- beneﬁt analysis. However, the literature shows that using food waste for biogas production is socioeconomically pro ﬁtable compared to in- cineration . Therefore, Norwegian au- thorities have proposed a regulation on the sorting of food waste from households . In this regard, a cost-bene ﬁt analysis comparing di ﬀerent treatment methods of food waste would not have political in ﬂuence, as the question has already been debated upon. In the European context, the same argumentation yields: becausethe Circular Economy Package requires higher amounts of recycled materials which can only obtained for food waste with biogas produc- tion, the cost would not have a real in ﬂuence. A cost-bene ﬁt of pre- vention measures compared to recycling measures would however beenof interest and is suggested as further research. In the author's eyes, the most interesting result is the comparison of the avoided emissions obtained by the upstream and various down- stream strategies. It can be argued that an LCA would have been a more robust and appropriate methodology for analysing this question. The aim of this study was however to analyse di ﬀerent indicators for the downstream system in the context of a transition to a circular economy;and compare the energy and emission performance with the potential upstream energy and emission savings. For this aim, we view the pre-sented methodology as robust. One should be cautious in applying the actual values presented in the results chapter. Due to the uncertainties introduced with the com- position analysis, this study only aims at ranking the performance of the various strategies and reveal critical parameters that in ﬂuence the overall performance level. 5. Conclusion The environmental bene ﬁts of household food waste prevention were compared to the bene ﬁts from various waste management stra- tegies in regard to recycling rates, energy e ﬃciency and emission e ﬃ- ciency, using MFA methodology combined with published LCA results. The method was demonstrated as a proof-of-concept case study for the city of Trondheim, Norway. In a reference scenario, food waste is treated together with residual waste and sent to incineration. A central sorting facility is introduced in a central sorting scenario, aiming at out- sorting parts of the household food waste for use as feedstock in biogas production. A food waste prevention scenario was also tested, con-sidering the e ﬀects of a reduction of 10%, 15% and 30% avoidable food waste in 2017, 2020 and 2025, respectively. The most e ﬀective food waste management strategy seems to be a combination of prevention and recycling strategies. On the one hand,focus should primarily be on prevention strategies for mitigating cli- mate change. The developed scenarios only considered a smallTable 3 Sensitivity analysis. Parameters Recycling e ﬃciency SR Energy e ﬃciency SR Emissions intensity SR tkm X12 0,015 Separation e ﬃciency CS facility 0,997 −0,055 Methane yield 0,763 LHV meat 0,091 LHV all other fractions 0,552 Process emissions - El 0,027 Process emissions - Diesel 0,002 Process emissions - Heat 0,004 Process emissions - Oil 0,018 Transport emissions - Diesel 0,227 Emission factor for electricity 0,094I. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 8 reduction in avoidable food wastage, but these had signi ﬁcant bene ﬁts in terms of future CO 2emissions. On the other hand, emphasis should be placed on the use of AD for biogas production as the future waste recycling option. This waste management system would mitigate re- source depletion, as it highly increases the recycling rates, and would lower the emissions compared to the current incineration process in use. One should be cautious in applying the actual values presented in the results chapter. Due to the uncertainties introduced with the com- position analysis, this study only aims at ranking the performance of the various strategies and reveal critical parameters that inﬂ uence the overall performance level. Even if prevention measures have been identi ﬁed, their e ﬀects and environmental bene ﬁts are considered di ﬃcult to quantify  and are therefore seldom examined ( Gentil et al., 2011 ). Further research on the topic is needed to successfully reduce the amounts of avoidable food waste, especially at the household level. References Bernstad, A., la Cour Jansen, J., 2011. A life cycle approach to the management of household food waste - A Swedish full-scale case study. Waste Manag. 31, 1879 –1896. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2011.02.026 . Bernstad, A., la Cour Jansen, J., 2012. Review of comparative LCAs of food waste man- agement systems –Current status and potential improvements. Waste Manag. 32, 2439 –2455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2012.07.023 . Bernstad, A., Andersson, T., 2015. Food waste minimization from a life-cycle perspective. J. Environ. Manage. 147, 219 –226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.07.048 . Bernstad, A., Cànovas, A., 2015. Current practice, challenges and potential methodolo- gical improvements in environmental evaluations of food waste prevention - A dis-cussion paper. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 101, 132 –142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resconrec.2015.05.004 . Bjørnerud, S., & Syversen, F. . Rapport plukkanalyse Trondheim 2017. Brattebø, H., Reenaas, M., 2012. Comparing CO2 and NOX emissions from a district heating system with mass-burn waste incineration versus likely alternative solutions–City of Trondheim, 1986 –2009. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 60, 147 –158. https://doi. org/10.1016/J.RESCONREC.2011.11.001 . Brunner, P., Rechberger, H., 2004. Practical Handbook of Material Flow Analysis. Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton . Callewaert, P. . Analysing the sustainability performance and critical improvement factors of urban municipal waste systems . Christensen, T., 2011. Solid Waste Technology & Management, Wiley. ed. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Chichester, United Kingdom . Clune, S., Crossin, E., Verghese, K., 2017. Systematic review of greenhouse gas emissions for diﬀerent fresh food categories. J. Clean. Prod. 140 , 766 –783. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.04.082 . Eberle, U., Fels, J., 2016. Environmental impacts of German food consumption and food losses. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 21, 759 –772. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-015- 0983-7 . Ecopro . Utprøving av ﬂytende biogjødsel. Retrieved from 1.03.2020 https:// ecopro.no/teknologi/pioner-pa-omrader/ . Edwards, J., Othman, M., Crossin, E., Burn, S., 2017. Anaerobic co-digestion of municipal food waste and sewage sludge: a comparative life cycle assessment in the context of awaste service provision. Bioresour. Technol. 223, 237 –249. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.biortech.2016.10.044 . European Commission, 2008. Directive 2008/98/EC. O ﬀ. J. Eur. Union 312, 3 . European Commission . Commission Decision of 18 November 2011 establishing rules and calculation methods for verifying compliance with the targets set in Article11 of Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (no- tiﬁed under document C 8165)OJ L 310, 25.11.2011, p. 11 –16. European Commission . Closing the loop: commission adopts ambitious new Circular Economy Package to boost competitiveness, create jobs and generate sus- tainable growth. Press release. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/ en/IP_15_6203 . Evangelisti, S., Lettieri, P., Borello, D., Clift, R., 2014. Life cycle assessment of energyfrom waste via anaerobic digestion: a UK case study. Waste manag 34 , 226 –237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2013.09.013 . FAO . Food wastage footprint: impacts on natural resources - Summary report. Gentil, E.C., Gallo, D., Christensen, T.H., 2011. Environmental evaluation of municipal waste prevention. Waste Manag. 31, 2371 –2379. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman. 2011.07.030 . Hung, C., Solli, C., 2012. Biogas from municiapal organic waste environmental holy grail? Energy Procedia 20, 11 –19.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2012.03.003 . Khoo, H.H., Lim, T.Z., Tan, R., 2010. Food waste conversion options in Singapore: en- vironmental impacts based on an LCA perspective. Sci. Total Environ. 408 , 1367 –1373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2009.10.072 . Khalid, A., Arshad, M., Anjum, M., Mahmood, T., Dawson, L., 2011. The anaerobic di- gestion of solid organic waste. Waste Manag. 31, 1737 –1744. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.wasman.2011.03.021 . Lausselet, C., Cherubini, F., Del, G., Serrano, A., Becidan, M., Strømman, A.H., 2016. Life- cycle assessment of a Waste-to-Energy plant in central Norway: current situation and eﬀects of changes in waste fraction composition. Waste Manag. 58, 191 –201. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2016.09.014 . Lebersorger, S., Schneider, F., 2011. Discussion on the methodology for determining food waste in household waste composition studies. Waste Manag. 31, 1924 –1933. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2011.05.023 . Martinez-Sanchez, V., Tonini, D., Møller, F., Astrup, T.F., 2016. Life-cycle costing of food waste management in Denmark: importance of indirect e ﬀects. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 4513 –4523. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b03536 . Matsuda, T., Yano, J., Hirai, Y., Sakai, S., 2012. Life-cycle greenhouse gas inventory analysis of household waste management and food waste reduction activities inKyoto, Japan. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 17, 743 –752. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11367-012-0400-4 . Miljødirektoratet, 2018. Utsortering og materialgjenvinning av biologisk avfall og plas- tavfall. M-1114. https://www.miljodirektoratet.no/publikasjoner/2018/oktober- 2018/utsortering-og-materialgjenvinning-av-biologisk-avfall-og-plastavfall/ . Modahl, I., Lyng, K.-.A., Stensgård, A., Saxegård, S., Hanssen, O.J., .Møller, H., Arnøy, S., Morken, J., Briseid, T., & Sørby, I. . Biogassproduksjon fra matavfall og møkkfra ku, gris og fjørfe. Status 2016  for miljønytte for den noske biogassmo- dellen BioValueChain. 1623. NIRAS . Kortlægning af indsamlings- og forbehandlingsmetoder for organisk a ﬀald. Projekt nr. 210105. https://danska ﬀaldsforening.dk/sites/danska ﬀaldsforening.dk/ ﬁles/media/document/kortlaegning_af_indsamlings-_og_forbehandlingsmetoder_for_ organisk_a ﬀald.pdf . Östergren, K., Gustavsson, J., Hansen, J., Møller, H., Research, O., Anderson, G., Bellettato, C., Canali, M., Falasconi, L., Gaiani, S., Vittuari, M., Salhofer, S., Linzner, R., & Caspar, B. . FUSIONS De ﬁnitional Framework for Food Waste. Raadal, H.L., .Stensgård, A.E., .Lyng, K.A., .& Hanssen, O.J. . Vurdering av vir- kemidler for økt utsortering av våtorganisk av ﬀall og plastemballasje. OR.01.16. Salhofer, S., Obersteiner, G., Schneider, F., Lebersorger, S., 2008. Potentials for the pre- vention of municipal solid waste. Waste Manag 28, 245 –259. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.wasman.2007.02.026 . Stensgård, A.E., Hanssen, O.J. . Matsvinn i Norge 2010-2015. Sluttrapport fra ForMat-prosjektet. OR.17.16. Stensgård, A.E., .Prestrud, K., Jørgen, O., Og, H., & Callewaert, P. . Matsvinn i Norge, Rapportering av nøkkeltall 2015-2017. OR.28.18. Stensgård, A.E., .Prestrud, K., Hanssen, O.J. & Callewaert, P. . Matsvinn i Norge, Rapportering av nøkkeltall 2015-2018. OR.32.19. Syversen, F., Hanssen, O.J., .& Bratland, H. . Nasjonal beregning av mengde matsvinn på forbrukerleddet. 1/2018. Trondheim kommune . Planprogram - Avfallsplan for Trondheim kommune 2018- 2030. Unander, S.M.O. . Analysing the sustainability performance and critical improve- ment factors of urban municipal waste systems . UNEP  Food Systems and Natural Resources. A Report of the Working Group on Food Systems of the International Resource Panel. Westhoek, H, Ingram J., Van Berkum, S., Özay, L., and Hajer M. Job Number: DTI/1982/PA ISBN: 978-92-807- 3560-4. Vanham, D., Bouraoui, F., Leip, A., Grizzetti, B., Bidoglio, G., 2015. Lost water and ni- trogen resources due to EU consumer food waste. Environ. Res. Lett. 10, 084008.https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/10/8/084008 . Varme, S. . https://www.statkraftvarme.no/om-statkraftvarme/vare-anlegg/ norge/trondheim/ .I. de Sadeleer, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160  104908 9 

