Review Waste management challenges in transition to circular economy e Case of Croatia Lidija Runko Luttenberger University of Rijeka, School of Polytechnics, Sveu /C20cili/C20sna avenija 4, Croatia article info Article history: Received 18 August 2019 Received in revised form16 January 2020Accepted 7 February 2020Available online 8 February 2020 Handling Editor: Prof. Jiri Jaromir Kleme /C20s Keywords: Waste management Circular economy BiowasteMarine litterCroatiaabstract Despite the obligations assumed by Croatian accession to the European Union in 2013, municipal waste still mainly ends at land ﬁlls, even in regions where signi ﬁcant investments were made in waste man- agement centres based on mechanical-biological treatment, and in which mixed waste is collected and processed into refuse-derived fuel and disposed at so-called bioreactor land ﬁlls. Waste management sector in Croatia necessitates substantial restructuring if it is to achieve compliance with circular economy. Since Croatia is far from achieving speci ﬁc targets, in 2016 an attempt was made to adopt a strategic waste management document that would have paved the way to reaching circular economytargets, but its contents were substantially modi ﬁed in course of its adoption, preserving the concept devised a decade and half ago. The paper presents waste and circularity indicators for Croatia, analyses national policies, targets, achievements and EU recommendations, and proposes the measures which would accelerate Croatia ’s path towards circular economy, resource ef ﬁciency, reduction of marine litter in the Adriatic and bio economy. The model is applicable to other countries in transition and those which still rely on land ﬁlling and linear economy concept. ©2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Contents 1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................................................. 1 2. State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................................................. 2 3. Waste and circularity indicators for Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..................................... 3 4. National policies, targets and achievements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..................................... 6 5. Overview of EU recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ............................................. 7 6. Proposed model for achieving circular economy targets in Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...................... 8 7. Marine litter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................................................. 9 8. Packaging waste and food . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................. 1 0 9. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................. 1 1 Declaration of competing interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........................1 2 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........................1 2 1. Introduction The volume and complexity of waste associated with modern economy poses serious risk to ecosystems and human health. Everyyear, an estimated 11.2 billion t of solid waste is collected world- wide and decay of the organic proportion of solid waste is contributing about 5 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions . Even though municipal waste only represents about 10% in weight of the total waste generated or about 30% of the generated amount of waste excluding major mineral wastes , following up on its evolution can give a good indication of changing consumptionE-mail address: lidija.luttenberger@uniri.hr . URL:https://bib.irb.hr/lista-radova?autor ¼148982 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Cleaner Production journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120495 0959-6526/ ©2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 patterns, national waste prevention performance and where citi- zens ’actions and involvement is most relevant . Circular economy  which implies waste pre- vention, reuse, and recycling, or upper tiers of waste hierarchy, directly contribute to clean production because of less overall waste produced and discarded from both manufacturing and raw material processing. Furthermore, as many as six Sustainable Development Goals   are related to solid waste management: Quality education  in the sense of equal ac- cess to technical, vocational and tertiary education with the focus on circular economy, systems thinking, design for circularity, entrepreneurship and innovation, Decent work and economic growth , Industry, innovation and infrastructure , Sustainable cities and communities , Sustainable con- sumption and production  and Partnerships for the goals . The concept of a circular economy is thus a powerful bridging concept to foster the fundamental links among resource use, waste, and emissions, and to contribute to integrating environmental  and economic  policies ( Mayer et al., 2019 ). In 2015 the European Commission adopted its action plan  aimed at accelerating transition of the EU towards circular economy, boosting global competitiveness, promoting sustainable economic growth and generating new jobs. The plan supports circular economy in each step of the value chain efrom production to consumption, repair and manufacturing, waste management and secondary raw materials that are fed back into the economy . Greater recycling and reuse are the main actions contributing to closing the loop. The Republic of Croatia made its accession to the EU in 2013, assuming considerable environmental commitments, particularly in the sector of munic- ipal waste. In spite of substantial investments in the sector made during the last decade, modest progress has been achieved so far, that being re ﬂected by the values of circular economy indicators. The purpose of this paper is to propose waste management model for the Republic of Croatia, that is integrated at the national level, sustainable, and compliant with circular economy principles as well as European Union recommendations and requirements. Elements of proposed concept were enshrined in a proposal of national waste management plan  in whose drafting the author was personally involved. The draft underwent public consultation, got necessary approvals by stakeholders, but was not adopted by the Government. The measures that the concept implies would facilitate the achievement of de ﬁned targets and obligations in an accelerated manner and also the implementation of circular economy. It is innovative in the sense that all national strategic documents to date have been based on a linear concept and focused on mixed waste and bottom tiers of waste hierarchy. The departure from such a mainstream had to date been undertaken only by few municipalities, which were either confronted with shortage of landﬁlling space or which timely understood that their budgets and citizens would sooner or later face booming prices of waste disposal. The paper also presents the analysis of drivers for current underperformance with regard to municipal waste management in the Republic of Croatia. It reviews waste management policiesadopted to date, current status and country-speci ﬁc features. Particular accent is placed on marine litter since Croatia has a very long indented coast on the semi-enclosed Adriatic Sea and is highly oriented to tourism. The potential of biowaste and bioeconomy in packaging sector, both of which contribute to compliance with waste hierarchy is elaborated as well. Given holistic focus of the topic, the author applied qualitative research based on direct observations, author ’previous research and experiences, of ﬁcial documents from different levels ofauthorities, literature surveys and the reports on current research on the subject, with an emphasis on the Republic of Croatia. Following introduction, review of the state of the art in research is provided in second chapter. The third chapter presents waste and circularity indicators for Croatia, while the fourth chapter analyses national policies, targets and achievements. The ﬁfth chapter which presents an overview of EU recommendations is followed by the proposal for achieving circular economy targets in Croatia throughimplementing advanced sustainable waste management approach. Last two chapters deal with marine litter and packaging waste, both of which have the potential for signi ﬁcant improvement through introducing proposed concept. 2. State of the art In early seventies in Europe, priority objective of removing waste from urban spaces in the interest of public hygiene was succeeded by environmental protection objective. By the end of seventies and early eighties, the production of enormous quantities of waste commanded for the provision of appropriate capacity. Prevention and closed material circles started in the nineties. In Croatia, where communal services in a number of towns have long tradition , the transition period and globalization in early nineties resulted in huge demand for solving the problem of increasing quantities of mainly packaging waste. Professional and scienti ﬁc debate con- cerning various options available in waste management, such as waste incineration, land ﬁlling, mechanical-biological treatment , source separation, recycling and composting pursued societal and technical demands described above. Any research for optimum solution in municipal waste man- agement obviously has to take into consideration prevailing local features. Namely, hardly any local arrangement is fully applicable for another site, regardless of possible geographical proximity. Another characteristic of scienti ﬁc research to date is that it has been more concentrated on hardware and its technical aspects, than on organizational issues of waste management. Such software aspect was then often elaborated by practitioners in the ﬁeld and environmental non-governmental organizations. The life cycle thinking  concept and quantita- tive tools such as life-cycle assessment  can provide an informed and science-based support to a more envi- ronmentally sustainable decision-making in waste management. Unfortunately, when LTC/LCA are applied to waste management services, typically the assessments focus on a comparison of different waste management options, not covering the entire life cycle of a product, in which waste management may play only a minor role . Also, the extent of the involvement of public and private sectors in waste management that varies across the states deserves exploration in terms of the effects on contract structures, costs, and the reasons why the different sectors play their different roles as frequently neither private nor external costs and bene ﬁts are well characterized . Municipal solid waste (hereinafter: MSW) management solutions must be ﬁnancially sustainable, technically feasible, socially, legally acceptable and environmen- tally friendly. Solid waste issue presents the biggest challenge for the authorities in both small and large cities ( Abdel-Shafy and Mansour, 2018 ). The research concerning municipal waste management very often compares different options of dealing with waste, presenting their advantages and shortcomings, as brie ﬂy analysed herein- below. The ﬁrst to be addressed here is MBT because such an option has been pursued in the Republic of Croatia ever since the nineties. Mechanical biological treatment of waste, also known asL.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 2 biomechanical treatment, is a form of pre-treatment of residual municipal waste consisting of a group of solid waste treatment systems. Most facilities use a combination of mechanical processes, such as shredding, metals recovery, sorting and biological treat- ment. The biological processes consist of aerobic and anaerobic degradation of the organic fraction. MBT grew in popularity as a result of the EU requirement to reduce the amount of biodegradable waste. This pre-treatment method was supposed to reduce the mass and volume of waste to be land ﬁlled . One of the products of MBT is unclean compost which contains elevated levels of heavy metals, pieces of plastics, metals and other unwanted fractions unsuitable for land use. The advantages of MBT are that it reduces volumes destined for land ﬁll, stabilizes organic fractions, reduces atmospheric emissions from land ﬁlls, and the plants have easily adaptable technologies for future transformation into quality composting plants, that is for the transition phase. However, through MBT organic faction is disposed in land ﬁll. Another product of MBT is refuse-derived fuel  which is dif ﬁcult to sell for burning. MBT is after all a disposal option . Treatment in the MBT plant with incin- eration of RDF in the waste-to-energy plant compared to inciner-ation in new waste-to-energy plant show that the scenario with lower overall environmental impact is MBT with incineration . Such analyses should obviously account for all externalities. Separate collection on the other hand is labour intensive but has low capital costs. Systems based on recycled production plus recycling offer substantial system-wide or life-cycle environmental advantages over systems based on virgin production plus either incineration or land ﬁlling. Early opponents included solid waste ofﬁcials who were resistant to change, and trash haulers and incinerator operators who resented the new competition ( Denison, 1996 ). The municipal costs for collection and treatment of waste are reduced with increasing recycling, mainly because high costs for incineration are avoided. However, solutions for mitigation of air pollution caused by increased collection and transport should be sought . Biowaste, according to Waste Framework Directive , includes garden and park waste, food and kitchen waste from households, restaurants, caterers and retail premises as well as comparable waste from food processing plants. It does not cover forestry or agricultural residue. Biowaste should not be confused with the broader category of biodegradable waste. Biodegradable waste, as de ﬁned by the Land ﬁll Directive, includes any waste that is capable of undergoing anaerobic or aerobic decomposition, such as food and garden waste, and paper and paperboard. One of the main drivers detected during the study for improving management of biowaste is the combination of ef ﬁcient and effective political, economic and legal programs, which leads to ef ﬁcient use of re- sources as well as environmental protection. Energy recovery is then mainly oriented at improving the ef ﬁciency of the whole management system rather than as a priority to be pursued in waste management . Once the goods become trash, burning them in an incinerator destroys those resources for good. Recycling most materials from municipal solid waste saves on average three to ﬁve times more energy than does burning them for electricity . Countries with the highest rates of garbage incineration all incinerate at least 50 percent of their waste, but they also tend to have high rates of recycling and composting of organic materials and food waste. Were it not for large-scale incineration, the environmentallyconscious countries would have even higher rates of recycling. Major problem with incineration is the long-term contracts that waste-to-energy plants sign with the cities that supply them with trash as incinerator operators need a guaranteed stream of wastesince incinerators are extremely expensive to build. Committing too much trash to incineration too soon by instituting land ﬁll bans results in competing with incineration for the available waste ( Yale Environment, 2013 ). Furthermore, for many materials in the household and business waste streams the release of carbon pollution from burning wastes for energy is more environmentally damaging than storing their carbon in modern land ﬁlls. In other words, it often is better to use more ef ﬁcient fuels to generate energy in order to maintain storage of carbon already sequestered in waste materials. The LCA study shows that burning wood wastes to produce electricity and/or heat as a substitute for natural gas fuel is more environmentally harmful than burying wood in a land ﬁll with a land ﬁll gas collection system. Recycling into reconstituted wood products or papermaking pulp is environmentally best when those options are available ( Morris, 2016 ). On the other hand, there is research that discusses the role of energy recovery of waste in the circular economy and closing the loop concept . When confronting incineration and land ﬁlling, the experts advocating incineration ascribe it the advantages of land conser- vation and preservation of non-renewable resources, and claim thatcarbon emitted is roughly equal, but only a third of the carbon in the waste is fossil-based, so fewer non-renewable resources are used. However, incineration converts less than 25% of material energy in garbage into marketed electricity compared with about 35% for coal and as much as 45% of some natural-gas systems. Even landﬁll methane burns with about 35% ef ﬁciency. Waste-to-energy plants require costly air-pollution controls to reduce emissions of hazardous metals and chemicals. Incineration inhibits recycling and composting efforts . According to the U.S. EPA, land ﬁlls are the third-largest source of methane in the US, behind industry and agriculture . Given that the transition to circular economy is a necessity for achieving resilience and resource ef ﬁciency, focusing on the case of Croatia is of particular interest precisely because its delay to implement any particular waste management policy overlapped with substantial policy and regulatory changes at the level of the European Union based on its Circular Economy Package. Such a transition from a failed model of land ﬁlling and wasting precious resources should be simpler and less costly than was the case for countries that through the years made signi ﬁcant investments in waste management infrastructure described above and which, being linear, have not complied with now prevailing circular economy principles and waste hierarchy. However, of ﬁcial policy in Croatia is by inertia still on the path of an outdated option, as analysed in chapter 4, together with evidences of that failure pre- sented in chapters 3 through 5. The transition proposal at national level presented in chapter 6 can hardly have alternatives which would be compliant with acquis Communautaire, regulations in force and sustainability principles. Obviously, solutions at the levels of communities could vary, but always within the limits of acceptable by legal, ecological, health and economic criteria. 3. Waste and circularity indicators for Croatia Circular economy is an umbrella concept incorporating different meanings, but despite different types circular economy strategies can be grouped according to their attempt to preserve functions, products, components, materials, or embodied energy ( Moraga et al., 2019 ). Macro scale indicators proposed by EU in its ‘CE monitoring framework ’ involve 10 indicators divided into four thematic areas: production and consumption, waste management, secondary raw materials, as well as competitiveness and innovation. Eight indicators form the CE monitoring frame- work are present in other European frameworks and are not uniqueL.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 3 to CE. The other indicators are under development: ‘Food waste ’ and ‘Green public procurement ’. The measurement of food waste was foreseen in the revision of the EU Waste Directive  while for Green public procurement , data are still unavailable. Signi ﬁcance of GPP for CE may depend on the inclusion of relevant requirement (e.g. reparability, durability, and recyclability) in public contracts and procurements. Both indicators are also in the scope of the Sustainable Development Goals for responsible consumption and production . Table 1 shows the comparison of available ‘CE monitoring framework ’indicators that are associated with municipal waste, for Croatia, EU-28, Italy, Germany, Hungary, and Austria. Countries selected either are in the vicinity or have achievements that Croatia should strive for in an accelerated manner. Also shown are the values of best achievements. Speci ﬁc waste streams considered are overall packaging, plastic packaging, biowaste, and construction and demolition waste. Total quantity of municipal waste produced annually in the Republic of Croatia in 2017 was 1.7 million tons . Generated municipal waste per capita of 416 kg is lower than EU average and other countries considered, except Hungary. Thehighest value of 781 kg is for Denmark and the lowest of 272 kg for Romania . However, generation of waste per GDP unit in Croatia is higher, except for Hungary. This indicator re ﬂects the waste intensity of the economy, providing a measure of “eco-ef ﬁciency ”, or shows that level of decoupling of waste generation from GDP growth. The lowest value of 24 kg per thousand euro is achieved by Norway . Generation of waste per domestic material consumption  for Croatia is the lowest among the states considered and EU-28 average. The indicator serves as a material ef ﬁciency indicator by comparing the quantity of waste generated to DMC. The smaller the value of the ratio, the better the performance. DMC provides a basisfor policies to decouple the growth of the economy from the use of natural resources. However, DMC is de ﬁned as the total amount of materials directly used in the economy (used domestic extraction plus imports), minus the materials that are exported. Also, the ratio is strongly in ﬂuenced by the non-metallic mineral component of DMC intensively used in the construction sector. Croatia for instance, being located on a vast karst territory, exploits limestone, as well as marl for cement industry and gravel. The more complex the material mix of a manufactured product, the more critical its attribution to a “dominant ”material category . Thus, low indicator value could be the result of relatively low production of municipal waste generated, divided by DMC. The lowest values in EU are achieved by Romania  and Norway . Recycling rate of municipal waste which provides a good indi- cation of the quality of the overall waste management system is signiﬁcantly lower for Croatia than for other countries and is half of that achieved by EU. Germany has the highest recycling rate . Recycling waste of overall packaging is also the lowest. In EU, Belgium achieved the highest rate . Recycling waste of plastic packaging is lower than EU average, Italy and Germany. Lithuania reached the highest plastic packaging recycling rate of 74.2%. Recycling of biowaste per capita for Croatia in 2016 was only 9%, that being one of the lowest in EU. So much so that for EU-27 , without Croatia, it amounts 82 kg per capita, while for EU-28, with Croatia it is 81 kg per capita. Austria scores as much as 182 kg of recycled biowaste per capita. Mentioned indicator is highly relevant for the circular economy. Kitchen and garden waste in Croatia constitute more than 35% of mixed municipal waste . Separate collection of biowaste and its subsequent recycling  is essential to achieving high recycling rates of municipal waste. Furthermore, biowaste from households is often mixed with other waste and land ﬁlled, contributing signi ﬁcantly to climate change. Table 1 Circular economy indicators associated with municipal waste, data from . Production and consumption Croatia EU Italy Germany Hungary Austria Waste generation Generation of municipal waste per capita  416 486  489  633  385 570  Generation of waste excluding major mineral wastes per GDP unit  75  65  69  55  98  52  Generation of waste excluding major mineral wastes per domestic material consumption 8.2  13.5  22.1  12.1  9.2  9.9  Waste management Recycling rates Recycling rate of municipal waste  23.6 46.4  47.7  67.6  35  57.7  Recycling/recovery for speci ﬁc waste streams Recycling rate of overall packaging  50.5 67  66.9  69.9  50.8 65.6  Recycling rate of plastic packaging  37.3 41.9  42.4  48  32  33.4  Recycling of biowaste  9  81  98  117  32  182  Recovery rate of construction and demolition waste  76  89  98  94  99  88  Secondary raw materialsContribution of recycled materials to raw materials demand Circular materials use rate  4.4  11.7  17.1  11.4  6.4  10.6  Competitiveness and innovationPrivate investment, jobs and gross added related to circular economy sectors Gross investment in tangible goods  at current prices)0.11 0.12  0.13  0.09  0.17 0.08  Persons employed  2.19 1.73  2.05  1.47  1.93 1.49  Number of patents related to recycling and secondary raw materials 0  355.62 18.91 89.87 1.33 8.22 L.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 4 Composting is considered recycling if it meets quality protocols, otherwise it is other recovery . Sankey diagram for biomass ﬂow based on the law of conservation of mass is currently available for EU28 economy only. An overview of EU food and waste ﬂows is provided in . Recovery rate of construction and demolition waste of 76% for Croatia is lower than that of EU-28 and other countries considered. Netherlands, Luxembourg and Malta score 100%. Circular materials use rate which measures the share of material recovered and fed back into the economy, thus saving extraction of primary raw materials, in overall material use. Croatia is below EU average and the countries considered. Maximum performance of 29% is by the Netherlands. Gross investment in tangible goods in the recycling sector, repair and reuse sector  and persons employed in the circular economy sector as the percentage of total employment for Croatia are respectively near average EU level and higher. That is probably the result of considering whole municipal utilities activity as circular economy. Namely, one of NACE (classi ﬁcation of eco- nomic activities issued by the European Commission) codes used to compute this indicator is collection of non-hazardous waste. With regard to innovation related to circular economy, there is not one patent related to recycling and secondary raw materials from Croatia. Germany scores highest in EU. China for instance has 3,811, Japan 445, and South Korea 392. In investigating principal historical and contemporary reasons for underperformance in Croatian waste management sector, as reﬂected in CE indicators, in December 2019 the author inter- viewed in written and by telephone the representatives of stake- holders in waste management sector, namely two representatives of municipal waste utilities who had scored the best in source separation at national level, above 60% according to HAOP  , and are thus the only ones who comply with EU standards, two representatives from the Ministry of Environment and Energy, and a representative from national association of cities. The representatives of record-setting municipal utilities indi- cated the following principal reasons for substandard performance of waste management system at national level: a. Poor and unfair regulatory framework drafted by of ﬁcials from the ministry in charge of waste management with no ﬁeld experience and no intention to consider suggestions from operators. b. Lack of will within self-government units and utilities to embark upon waste processing, since it commands for greater effort on their side and higher prices for end users. c. Current punishing policy is detrimental for municipalities suc- cessful in waste separation (incentive compensation for reducing mixed municipal waste explained later and no land ﬁll tax). d. Land ﬁll tax revenues, had such an instrument been introduced, could be used by the state for ﬁnancing circular economy ac- tivities and innovations. That would result in higher economic activity without dependence on subsidizing. e. RDF from potential 11 receiving facilities may not be disposed of adequately in the country, so disposal costs become signi ﬁcant. The cycle may not be closed, and the product is piled up. f. The market of recyclables is currently collapsing. Representatives from the Ministry in charge of waste manage- ment stated the following: a. To author ’s comment that land ﬁll closures are taking place with no technological alternatives at higher level of waste hierarchy provided, so that new so-called bioreactor land ﬁlls are beingcreated, the response was that there should be no more biore- actor land ﬁlls in addition to the existing two and that bioreactor landﬁlls are the result of biowaste separation and its processing in the past. It should be pointed out here by the author that some 15 years ago it was thought that in the Eastern and southEastern European states with a backlog demand for environ- mentally sound MSW management, simple MBT systems mightprovide a vital contribution to accomplishing the standards and targets set out by a future Europe-wide Framework Directive. Besides lower capital cost compared to thermal treatment, further potential advantages put forward were applicability in smaller catchment areas, ﬂexibility and adaptability to meet increasing demands, controllability of material ﬂows, and combinability with waste treatment technologies, see Steiner  . Thus, Croatia ’s system for residual waste management which was decided top down by 2007 e2015 Waste Manage- ment Plan divided the country into 13 catchment areas (pres- ently valid Waste Management Plan reduces them to 11) with one centre, designated as the Regional Waste management Centre  in each area. The RWMCs are owned and are operated by public companies owned by the county, or counties connected to a centre. b. Unresolved issue regarding disposal of biodegradable fraction of waste as a separate category in disposal of which Croatia is lagging behind. c. The absence of advanced system for handling food waste. d. The market for secondary raw materials is insuf ﬁciently devel- oped and inadequately keeps abreast with door-to-door selec- tion and circular economy principles. e. Much effort is focused on building the infrastructure needed for waste management and very little on conscience raising that is indispensable for achieving purposeful ef ﬁciency of that infrastructure. The representative from national association of cities empha- sized the following: a. There are some basic reasons for which the self-government units are not in a position to develop the infrastructure which they are conferred responsibility for by law and without whichno sustainable system may be achieved, i.e. small local com- posting plants and sorting plants for preliminary sorting of separately collected potentially useful raw materials. Public calls for sorting plants and biowaste treatment plants by Energy Ef- ﬁciency and Environment Protection Fund are deliberately or accidentally conceived in a way that self-government units may not even apply because minimum amounts of subsidy are inappropriate, exceeding in many cases the entire project costs. b. Vicinity principle is being pronouncedly neglected in Croatia. c. The education of service bene ﬁciaries co- ﬁnanced by the Fund in its very implementation simply circumvents the actual objective. d. There exists no ef ﬁcient “communal punishment ”that would discipline also the non-obedient users as the state has not yet faced appropriately the problem of communal order and municipal police along with their competences. e. The mayors are threatened with huge penalties, but no one has as yet been punished. f. The state insists to interfere into price structure of public service and that proves to be a failure because in practice the thriving self-government units are being forced to take a step back. g. There is no political nerve for introducing the land ﬁll tax. What has been introduced is the so-called punitive incentive compensation. However, its prescribed algorithm is all but stimulating as similar charge is imposed on those who have noL.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 5 separate collection and those who separately collect close to 60%. The reason is the criterium based on quantity of mixed municipal waste land ﬁlled (and not the percentage of separate collection) and the data for base year set is far from accurate and reliable, so a number of municipalities are to be unjusti ﬁably penalized. On the other hand, the Ministry refuses to rectify evident error and, by enacting poor, hasty and insuf ﬁciently informed regulations produces chaotic situation. h. Recyclables market is currently becoming a problem in Croatia as well. The state should ﬁnd the way to absorb staggering market prices and facilitate introducing own materials pro- cessing plants. Also, designing recyclable packaging is becoming crucial. Therefore, in spite of often diverse stances and mutual blaming among stakeholders, the fact is that they share some common opinions regarding the reasons for inadequate performance of na- tional waste management sector and necessary actions: non- existent land ﬁll tax, poor market for raw materials, the need to ﬁnance own circular economy industry, the need for separate collection of biodegradable waste, and higher emphasis on education. Furthermore, the 2013 Waste Act removed regional competence for developing waste management plans, so coherence between the policies made and implemented at different levels is still insufﬁciently clear. Next chapter analyses the discrepancy between present legislative obligations and state of affairs in waste management. 4. National policies, targets and achievements Envisaged concept of municipal waste management in Croatia based on collection and processing of mixed waste in large regional/county MBT centres with bioreactor land ﬁlls and RDF production never completely materialized. In fact, it became outdated in technological and regulatory sense ( Runko Luttenberger, 2018 ) even before its implementation. The concept was originally formalized by 2005 Waste Management Strategy of the Republic of Croatia  and Waste Management Plan of the Republic of Croatia for 2007 e2013 period . The MBT centres as built, two of those being in operation (Mari /C20s/C19cina in Mountain Littoral County and Ka /C20stijun in Istria County), are not in compliance with EU Waste Framework Directive . They may not achieve the targets set and they simply incorporate new land ﬁlls so valuable resources are irreversibly lost. Overall capacity of all centres built and planned is about 1.3 million tons , that exceeding total quantity of mixed municipal waste land ﬁlled. Therefore 50% separation pursuant to obligations under WFD re- sults in overcapacity. Furthermore, RDF requires either cement kilns or dedicated incinerators. In Croatia there is a lack of burning capacity, producers of RDF have to pay cement kilns to burn, and cement kilns accept only a very limited quantity of RDF of de ﬁned quality. In the process of accession of the Republic of Croatia to the EU, Croatia assumed certain obligations to comply with the provisions set out in accession documents , the 1999 Land ﬁll Directive , and the 2008 Waste Framework Directive. The time limits are imposed concerning the achievement of targets, that is  permissible quantities to be land ﬁlled on substandard landﬁlls,  limits concerning permissible quantities for disposal of biodegradable municipal waste,  providing for the operation of separate waste collection system, and  providing for appropriate processing of waste streams, see Table 2 . National legislation scheduled for adoption, besides the 2013 Act on Sustainable WasteManagement  was also the new six- year waste management plan  by 2014, waste prevention programme  by 2013, and the implementing regulation on municipal waste management by 2014. The procedure of drafting and adopting mentioned docu- ments got into substantial delay. Also, the 2015 Draft WMP ( MENP, 2015 ) with regard to achieving EU targets resulted in excess ca- pacity of waste management centres and the increase in unit cost of waste processing . It was only in 2016 that the Republic of Croatia expressed for the ﬁrst time its of ﬁcial support to EU Circular Economy Package pro- posal and started to produce new or review existing legislation in order to comply with circular economy concept and the EU docu- ments in force. Waste Management Plan 2017 e2022 and Waste Prevention Programme were adopted only in January 2017 ( Republic of Croatia, 2017 ). Shortly following its adoption, the WMP was partly modi ﬁed by Government Decision ( Government of the Republic of Croatia, 2017 ) that was never published in national of ﬁcial journal. Mentioned planning documents in fact endeavour to preserve previous policies based on mixed waste treatment with RDF pro-duction and land ﬁlling of „treated “waste. The Regulation on Municipal Waste Management w a s adopted in May 2017 and entered in force in November 2017. The amendments thereto  are currently undergoing public consultation. According to data issued by Croatian Agency for the Environ- ment and Nature , the institution which in 2018 merged with the Ministry of Environment and Energy, recycling rate for municipal waste of 23.6% is far below target share of 50% for 2020 laid down under Sustainable Waste Management Act (Article 55). The recycling of four fractions emetal, plastics and paper from municipal waste (recycling quantities compared to manufactured quantity of such fractions) is 30%. Only eight self-government units exceeded 50% recycling target, and those are mostly smaller-size communities. At counties level, the highest rates of municipal waste recovery have been reached by counties situated in north-west part of the country (Me Cimurje, Vara /C20zdin and Zagreb), and least rates by those located along the Adriatic Sea coast ( /C20Sibenik-Knin, Zadar and Split-Dalmatian counties), that being detrimental with regard to marine litter. Not to be underestimated are also the quantities of waste generated in tourism sector estimated to be 155,958 t in 2017 and constituting as much as 9.1% of total municipal waste. The speci ﬁc generation of municipal waste of somewhat above 400 kg/cap/yr comprises also tourism, which accounts for around 200,000 population equivalents. Due to the country ’s nature as a seasonal  tourist destination, this ﬁgure has to be tripled or quadrupled when, for example, considering the need for capacity to manage waste at the peak of the tourist season ( JRC EC, 2011 ). A total of 1.236 million tons of municipal waste was directed to 120 land ﬁlls in the Republic of Croatia and 6609 t to neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina. Overall, 72% of municipal waste produced has been transferred to land ﬁlls. Out of the total of 1.091million tons biodegradable municipal waste produced, 34,891 t was composted in 10 composting plants, while 3625 t of municipal waste was digested in 5 biogas plants. The quantity of biodegradable municipal waste land ﬁlled in Croatia was 0.8 million tons. Thus, the targets set in Article 24 of Sustain- able Waste Management Act related to reduction of biodegradable municipal waste have not been achieved, see Fig. 1 . The greatest quantities of biodegradable municipal waste pro- duced are recorded in the City of Zagreb, Split-Dalmatia County and Littoral-Mountain County. The ranking with regard to quantitiesL.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 6 landﬁlled for two of them is also the highest. The last one has an MBT waste management centre operative and it is probable that it does not record land ﬁlling of biodegradable waste as such. In April 2019 public consultation was launched concerning the Proposal amending the Plan of use of funds earned through sale of carbon emission units by auction in the Republic of Croatia till 2020 by the Ministry of Environment and Energy  which attributes waste management centres processing mixed waste the priority measure with highest allocation  of funds. It is indeed unclear by which criteria such centres which themselves do not comply with vicinity and pay-as-you-throw principles, which emit methane and other greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, may qualify for ﬁnancing earned by sale of emission allowances. 5. Overview of EU recommendations In its Country Report Croatia for 2019 , the European Commission notes that far too much waste is put on land ﬁlls and too little is recycled. It also states that in environmental services, around half million people received access to newly built waste- management centres and around half million people alreadyTable 2 National targets . LANDFILLING /C15Landﬁlling no more than 1.01 million tons of waste on substandard land ﬁlls in 2016 /C15Landﬁlling no more than 0.8 million tons of waste per annum on substandard land ﬁlls in 2017 and 2018 /C15Discontinuing land ﬁlling of waste on substandard land ﬁlls by 31 December 2018 DISPOSAL OF BIODEGRADABLE MUNICIPAL WASTE /C15Disposal of no more than 0.378 million tons of biodegradable municipal waste1 on all land ﬁlls in the Republic of Croatia during 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019 calendar years /C15Disposal of no more than 0.265 million tons of biodegradable municipal waste on all land ﬁlls in the Republic of Croatia during 2020 and 2021 calendar years SEPARATE WASTE COLLECTION /C15Paper, metals, plastics and glass /C15Special categories of wastea /C15Separate biowaste collection system for the sake of composting and anaerobic digestion APPROPRIATE PROCESSING OF WASTE STREAMS /C15Ensuring that at least 50% of the mass of waste paper, metals, plastics and glass produced during calendar year in households and from other sources is r ecovered in the process of preparing for reuse or processed in a recovery process considered to be recycling  /C15Ensuring that at least 70% of the mass of non-hazardous construction waste is recovered in the process of preparation for reuse or is treated in a recove ry process that is considered to be recycling or the process that involves the use of such material for back ﬁlling  /C15Introducing compulsory sorting of waste that is not separated or is partially separated in a household /C15Providing for appropriate treatment of waste that remains after extracting waste paper, metal, plastics and glass from mixed municipal waste 1refers to paper and cardboard, timber, kitchen waste, waste from canteens, biodegradable garden waste, waste from green markets and mixed municipal waste with established biodegradable part. aelectrical and electronic waste, waste batteries and accumulators, end of life vehicles, end of life tyres, waste lubricating oils, waste textile an d footwear, medical waste, asbestos waste. 020000040000060000080000010000001200000t  biodegradable municipal waste produced biodegradable municipal waste land ﬁlled target by 31.12.2013  target by 31.12.2016  target by 31.12.2020  Fig. 1. Biodegradable waste produced and land ﬁlled since 1997 till 2017 with regard to targeted quantities and deadlines laid down under Waste Framework Directive .L.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 7 gained access to modern water treatment and supply services, all amounting to a cleaner and healthier environment for citizens. The Report furthermore states that Croatia requires substantial investment in waste and water management, which are underde- veloped and that the shift away from land ﬁlling towards separate collection and recycling is slow. Land ﬁlling of municipal waste is considerably above the EU average of 24%. Croatia also scores low in terms of recycling, with only 23.6% of municipal waste materials recycled, compared to an EU average of 46.4% . Therefore, Croatia is at risk of not reaching the 50% preparation for re-use/recycling target on municipal waste by 2020. Reaching the even more ambitious and binding target of 65% by 2035 will require shifting investments further up the waste hierarchy. It also states that in 2017, the long-awaited national Waste Management Plan 2017e2022 was adopted, but its implementation faces delays and that improving Croatia ’s performance in waste management re- quires substantial investment in waste infrastructure. In its Annex D under policy objective concerning low carbon and greener Europe it points out that the shift away from land ﬁlling towards separate collection and recycling is stalling. Also, high priority investment needs have been identi ﬁed to promote the transition to a circular economy, and in particular to  support systems of separate collection, composting and sorting plants and other measures preparing for reuse and recycling, develop alter- natives to raw materials and increase demand for recycled content,  modernise and upgrade existing recycling and waste treatment infrastructure to adapt to new long-term recycling targets,  raise citizen awareness to sustainable consumption practices and behaviour and improve capacity for all stakeholders including though cooperation and share of experiences between Member States, and  improve the knowledge base and monitoring of waste and material streams. Country-speci ﬁc roadmap for Croatia issued in January 2016 report  points out that in respect of packaging manage- ment Croatia is one of the few European countries that has a de- posit for disposable beverage packaging in place. The practice, introduced in 2006 for non-re ﬁllable beverage packaging is less important in terms of yields  than it is on the appearance of public space, with a generally perceived reduction of littering in, and beyond, touristic areas. It also notes that current approach seems to be to support the provision of recycling through ﬁnancial disbursements rather than giving a clear incentive to prevent and recycle waste through increasing the costs of disposal of residual waste. Thus, the cost for implementing the RWMCs will be borne by the Environmental Protection and Energy Ef ﬁciency Fund  which is established for the purpose of ﬁnancing of the preparation, implementation and development of programmes and projects and similar activities in the ﬁeld of conservation, sustainable consumption, protection and improve- ment of the environment, and in the ﬁeld of energy ef ﬁciency and use of renewable energy sources. It also points out that gate fees at the RWMCs reported might turn out to be an underestimate when compared with gate fees in other countries. The point highlighted is that the centrally managed EPEEF covers etogether with support from the EU ethe investment expenditures of the RWMC, whilst the remaining investments  are funded to the tune of 40 e60% by EPEEF depending on the ﬁnancial status of the municipalities. The Report also points out that speci ﬁc proposal in MBT plants is for a bio-drying technology linked to bioreactor land ﬁlls, that being a strange combination, not least since the use of bioreactor land ﬁlls would suggest the waste is not stable when placed in the land ﬁll, implying that little would have been done to move towards land ﬁll Directive targets. The facilities show generous, spacious layouts and contain equipment perceived as the “high end ”of MBT technology,suggesting that a considerable amount of over-engineering may have occurred. In addition, total treatment capacity of about 1.3 million tons/y is extremely high given the current level of MSE generation . Even allowing for waste growth, this level of treatment will make it extremely dif ﬁcult for the levels of recycling being proposed in the revised legislative proposal in the circular economy package to be met. Given that the Commis- sion has ambitions to increase recycling targets to 65% of all MSW, the capacity planning could potentially limit the scope for recycling in the coming years. That raises questions regarding the value for money of planned investments, appropriate infrastructure to allow prevention, preparation for reuse, and recycling activities to ﬂourish  and meeting new targets. With regard to further updates to National Waste Management Plan, mentioned roadmap recommended that clear speci ﬁcation is needed of what is required in respect of separate collection at the local level, a clear strategy for the management of municipal waste in the future taking into account future higher targets, a consider- ation of approaches to collecting food waste, and the introduction of a plan to extend the roll out of door to door collection systems. Italso recommended a clear devolution of responsibilities down to the local level, including the establishment of a framework for monitoring performance, reform of funding mechanisms, including consideration of the introduction of a residual waste tax as a replacement to the current EPEEF, the activities to support waste prevention and re-use, roll of PAYT systems, programme to support municipalities and educate householders, and improvements in data quality and transparency. EU ’s early warning report  issued in 2018 makes part of the Commission ’s overall implementation report and aims to assist Member States at risk of failing to meet the 2020 target of 50% preparation for reuse/recycling of municipal waste set out in Article 11 of Directive 2008/98/EC. It provides an overview of possible actions to improve performance, which involve data reporting, extended producer responsibility, separate collection with an emphasis on door-to-door service, regulation and in- centives for local authorities, pay-as-you-throw schemes, communication and awareness-rising, technical support to mu- nicipalities, and the use of EU funds. It points out that current allocation remains too heavily focused on residual waste treatment infrastructure provided at the regional waste management centres instead of support for separate collection of dry recyclables and of biowaste and that funding should be oriented towards delivering results while sub-standard and underperforming systems should not qualify for funding. With regard to regional approach to waste management, it states that speci ﬁc operational considerations be taken into account to improve waste management. 6. Proposed model for achieving circular economy targets in Croatia Ofﬁcial Croatian decision in 2016 to embark upon circular economy path resulted in an attempt to devise in a holisticapproach the method ensuring reversal of inadequate waste management policy and fast-track achievement of targets at min- imum cost. The concept was then basically enshrined in Draft Waste Management Plan 2016 e2022 and Waste Prevention Pro- gramme . The measures envisaged for achieving na- tional targets are listed in Table 3 . The recycling target for municipal waste was at minimum one half of the quantity of mixed municipal waste land ﬁlled annually, with potential for recycling the materials contained in that quantity estimated to be even higher than 50%. In order to achieve recycling targets, it would be necessary to collect separately a signi ﬁcant partL.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 8 of plastics, paper, metal, glass and also textile and biodegradable waste, which constitute municipal waste. In other words, dry fraction such as paper and cardboard, metal, plastics, glass and textile or all waste packaging and similar materials should be collected separately from biodegradable waste and mixed munic- ipal waste. It is also necessary to increase the capacities for sepa- rating waste esorting plants (for dry fraction and where appropriate mixed waste) and the capacities for treating biode- gradable waste . The structure of designed waste management concept is shown inFig. 2 , with targeted material ﬂows quanti ﬁed in Fig. 3 . Estimated 0.39 million tons of bio waste would be an input for home and municipal composting as well as biogas production. Minimum re- sources were left for disposal, meaning that signi ﬁcantly less ca- pacity in MBT waste management centres with regard to those planned would be necessary. In support of proposed concept and with regard to greenhouse effect, a study for the EU Commission comparing different waste management options from a greenhouse gas perspective concludes that overall, source segregation of mixed solid waste  fol- lowed by recycling  and composting/AD  gives the lowest net ﬂux of greenhouse gases, compared with other options for the treatment of bulk MSW . Such ﬁnding is in favour of the concept proposed. It must be pointed out that the Regulation on municipal waste management  currently in force in some respects represents sound basis for embarking upon achieving improved waste management system, challenging the long ago planned and now gradually implemented MBT waste management centres. However, and as pointed out through the interviews, in its present form it also has signi ﬁcant shortcomings. As mentioned earlier, Draft Waste Management Plan2016e2022 based on circularity principle was not adopted in its original form, it having been substantially modi ﬁed in the new draft that was later presented and adopted ( Republic of Croatia-OG, 2017 ). Quantitative and qualitative comparison of RWMC MBT and proposed resource ef ﬁcient system proposed by Draft WMT is presented in Table 4 . 7. Marine litter Marine litter in the Adriatic Sea presents a signi ﬁcant problem for Croatia. Although Adriatic Sea washes the coasts of other countries as well, Croatia is with its long coast more affected by the problem and signi ﬁcantly contributes to its very generation. Namely, marine litter to a great extent mirrors waste management problem on the land. Therefore, trying to resolve marine litter problems means adopting appropriate policy with regard to waste generated at sea, principally by boating tourism, insuf ﬁciently regulated and expanding marinas, cruising and ﬁshing, and at land. Relying on collection, transport (very often seaborne from the islands) and treatment of mixed waste in order to produce RDF of low quality for which there is no market as is the case in Croatiameans movement of waste over great distances, non-compliance with proximity principle, its potential leakage, production of waste in a new form, and the creation of new land ﬁlls. Considering the impact of such a system on service price it could also result in creation of illegal land ﬁlls in karst terrain, in the vicinity of wa- tercourses and along the coastline, meaning that destination of such waste will probably be the sea with all the impacts on marine ecosystems, public health, standard of living and tourism ( Runko Luttenberger, 2018 ). Marine litter is one of the clearest symbols of a resource inef ﬁcient economy, because valuable materials are polluting beaches and damaging the environment instead of beingTable 3 Measures for achieving national targets. NATIONAL TARGET MEASURES Landﬁlling /C15Adopting the criteria concerning compliant land ﬁlls /C15Deﬁning the compliance status for each land ﬁll /C15Deﬁning the mass of waste allowed to be disposed on each particular substandard land ﬁll /C15Monitoring the quantity of waste disposed on substandard land ﬁll in real time by means of electronic system recording the production and ﬂow of waste  /C15Preventing the disposal of quantities exceeding those permissible on substandard land ﬁlls by introducing gate fee /C15Procurement of works, services and equipment aimed at bringing land ﬁlls into compliance /C15Introducing a ban on waste disposal on substandard land ﬁlls after 31 December 2018 Disposal of biodegradable municipal waste/C15Designating the mass of biodegradable waste allowed for disposal at a particular land ﬁll /C15Designating the share of biodegradable waste in mixed municipal waste /C15Reducing the quantity of mixed municipal waste produced /C15Reducing the share of biodegradable waste in mixed municipal waste (stimulating composting in a household, stimulating the construction and out ﬁtting of local plants for biological treatment- composting yards, anaerobic decomposition, etc. of biodegradable waste from restaurants, parks and from green markets, cessation of waste status for compost and anaerobic digestate) /C15Reducing the quantity of mixed municipal waste for land ﬁlling (sorting plants for dry fraction and for mixed waste, introducing the standard for minimum processing of waste prior to land ﬁlling, introducing new methods of municipal waste bins content control and user identi ﬁcation) /C15Stimulating the reduction of total quantity of waste land ﬁlled by introducing the land ﬁll gate fee Separate waste collection /C15Providing for the operation of separate collection of paper, metal, plastics and glass /C15Providing for the operation of separate collection of special categories of waste /C15Providing for the operation of separate biowaste collection /C15Providing for the operation of local mixed municipal waste collection system Appropriate processing of waste streams/C15Ensuring that at least 50% of the mass of waste paper, metals, plastics and glass produced during calendar year in households and from other sources is recovered in the process of preparing for reuse or processed in a recovery process considered to be recycling  epresently we are at 17% /C15Ensuring that at least 70% of the mass of non-hazardous construction waste is recovered in the process of preparation for reuse or is treated in a recovery process that is considered to be recycling or the process that involves the use of such material for back ﬁlling (for 2019, 2020, 2021) /C15Introducing compulsory sorting of waste that is not separated or is partially separated in a household /C15Providing for appropriate treatment of waste that remains after extracting waste paper, metal, plastics and glass from mixed municipal waste Source of data: MENP, 2016 .L.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 9 pumped back into the economy . Valid 2017 e2022 WMP admits that the system of marine litter management has not been established and that currently there are neither of ﬁcial data nor appropriate assessment regarding the quantity of marine waste in the Republic of Croatia. Marine Strategy Framework Directive  which among other things de- ﬁnes important descriptors on pressures on marine environment, marine litter being one of them, lays down obligation on the Member State to adopt a marine strategy, which obligation the Republic of Croatia has not yet ful ﬁlled. Very important aspect in abating marine litter is waste pre- vention. In that respect as well, the concept proposed through DraftWMP  was more speci ﬁc  in that it stipulated the legislation which should be adopted or amended, speci ﬁed the number of waste prevention centres to be established, the institutional and regulatory actions to be taken for preventing food waste, and emphasized the importance of personal consumption of population, particularly in the part related to habits when provisioning for food and drinks, clothes, footwear, furniture and market supply. 8. Packaging waste and food Another important contribution in reducing marine litter, Fig. 2. Structure of designed municipal waste management system . Fig. 3. Targeted waste ﬂows .L.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 10 particularly in a country that relies heavily on tourism with all its seasonality and periodical pressures on public services would be implementing the policies to reduce and modify packaging, the materials used therefor and to avoid one-use and disposable plastic materials of all types. Such an approach obviously implies the change of habits, intervention in supply chain and increasing do- mestic supply of agricultural goods in particular ( Runko Luttenberger, 2018 ). Sustainability and resilience depend on the circularity in food sector, see also  and plastic sector which both exert a great impact on resources, waste, climate, soil, and pollution . Sustainable production and use of biodegradable bioplastics would greatly contribute to returning the resources contained in food waste to the soil. Biodegradable plas- tics would also decrease the amount of microplastics ending in the sea. Although natural resources should be taken in consideration when assessing sustainability of bio-based plastics (fertile land and land-use change, both direct and indirect, water, phosphate, and energy), the use of biodegradable bio-based plastics in packaging applications and for food waste carriers may also signi ﬁcantly in- crease the quantity of separately collected food and garden waste. It may also reduce contamination of compost by non-biodegradable plastics. With such co-bene ﬁts its usage becomes attractive. Thus, bio-based plastics that has low carbon footprint and is sourced sustainably may link bio-based economy to circular economy. Biodegradability thus represents an asset for speci ﬁc purposes e agricultural and in stimulating separate food waste collection ( CE Delft, 2017 ). Besides ensuring good environmental status of the sea, rivers, air, soil and land cover, such a task provides signi ﬁcant opportunities for eco-innovation, small local businesses and local agriculture. Besides that, green public procurement, localization, and access to and consumption of tap water could signi ﬁcantly reduce the leakage of plastics into environment ( Luttenberger and Runko Luttenberger, 2018 ). EU recently introduced new measures to address plastic waste and pollution through 2018 European strategy for plastics in a circular economy  and Single Use Plastics Directive proposal . Also, chemicals leaching from plastics pose a great hazard  ;Steingraber, 2010; Scott, 2015 ).Croatia is not proactive with regard to sustainable packaging, being concerned mainly with end-of-pipe solutions, however inefﬁciently. Prevention as the top priority measure in waste hier- archy is not tackled at all. At the same time, about 400.000 t of food is thrown annually in Croatia . In addition, current WMP and WPP incorporated therein do not place signi ﬁcant emphasis on neither packaging nor composting, while Draft food waste prevention plan  has undergone public consulta- tion only in 2019. 9. Conclusion Croatia is the example of a country where substantial public money has been invested in an inef ﬁcient waste management system in spite of EU legal framework it has to comply with. Implementation proved to be the problem. The overcapacity in planned MBT plants for mixed waste is obvious given the obliga- tions with regard to separation and processing. There is a lack of implementation of the waste hierarchy with over-emphasis on residual waste treatment. Also, roles and responsibilities among authorities at different levels are often not matching each other. In spite of often diverse stances among different stakeholders involved, the fact is that they share some common opinions regarding inadequate performance of national waste management sector: non-existent land ﬁll tax, poor market for raw materials, the need to ﬁnance own circular economy industry, the need for separate collection of biodegradable waste, and placing greater accent on education. Waste management centres in operation in Croatia are not the best available technology and actually place heavy ﬁnancial burden, both in terms of investment, operation and maintenance on tax- payers, service users, and municipalities. The achievement so far is increased land ﬁlling, accumulating low quality RDF that has no market nor paid recipient, loss of recyclables, and loss of valuable biowaste. Furthermore, increasing quantities of sludge from inef- ﬁcient energy and water consuming centralized wastewater plants are posing an additional problem for existing waste management facilities. The issue of biodegradable waste which, when mixed with other waste creates enormous problems at so-called bioreactor land ﬁllsTable 4 Multicriteria comparison of RWMC MBT system deployed and proposed resource ef ﬁcient system. RWMC MBT system Resource ef ﬁcient system Capital expenses 700 million EUR þland costs 350 million EUR Operating expenses 100-150 million EUR per annum Potential for reduction of present utilities cost of 40 e70 million EUR Processing capacity 1.3 Mt of mixed municipal waste annually (min 50% overcapacity)390,000 tons biowaste, 600,000 tons recyclables, 270,000 tons of mixed municipal waste Modularity No YesFinal product 42,000 tons of RDF þnew land ﬁlls Compost, 450,000 tons recycled matter, <325.000 t mixed municipal waste for RWMC or compliant land ﬁlls Employment 500 e600 150,000 e20,000 Impact on resources Detrimental Linear economyInsufﬁcient upgrade compared to land ﬁllingBeneﬁcial Circular economy Pollution Degradation of natural capital ewater, air climate , soilNatural capital preservation Reduced carbon footprint Compliance with acquis and national regulationsNo Yes Potential for achieving more stringent circular economy targetsNo Yes Social impact Sporadic Strengthening local economy Price for customers Drastic increase  Minimum increase compared to present unsustainable system a Advantages Business as usual Boosting economic and environmental sustainability of the society, opportunities for SMEs, innovations, local businesses aBased on comparison of prices of service in a community that had previously locally introduced resource ef ﬁcient system and those in a city where RWMC MBT centre is operating.L.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 11 of MBT plants in terms of emissions of methane and noxious sub- stances, odours for nearby population, and space requirements can be resolved simply and inexpensively by home composting and municipal composting schemes, aerobic and anaerobic, for sepa- rately collected biowaste. Such a solution for both achieving the targets and for preserving the environment and soil is particularly suitable for Croatia, a country of numerous dispersed communities and few larger cities. Organic output from mechanical biological treatment having unsorted municipal waste as an input is not recycling. Quality compost is necessary for agriculture and adding organic content to impoverished soil, therefore land ﬁll diversion targets should be associated with composting, aerobic and anaerobic. Croatia should embark upon and accelerate its transition to- wards circular economy in order to meet its international obliga- tions and also to preserve its precious environment. Such a task presents signi ﬁcant challenges on policy makers and operators, but at the same time also provides great opportunities for academia, innovators, SMEs and consequently quality employment. Circular concept as proposed in Draft WMP 2016 e2022 involving waste prevention, waste separation, sorting, and com-posting should be implemented, and resource inef ﬁcient mixed waste concept abandoned. Such an approach would be in line with ofﬁcial recommendations, roadmaps and warning reports issued by the EU. Valid WMP simply builds on the previous policies. Marine litter issue which affects sea surface, water column, sea bottom, beaches and biota and thus the quality of environment for coastal communities and tourists would thus be embraced in an integrated manner. The country should also be proactive in adopting the policies to reduce and modify packaging, linking bioeconomy to circular economy through ﬂows of food, waste food and plastics. Public authorities should use the instrument of green public procurement and promote the access to and consumption of locally produced food and tap water. Proposed model is applicable to other countries as well which need to implement ef ﬁcient transition from land ﬁlling to circular economy and preferably avoid any mistakes possibly committed by those who had abandoned land ﬁlling in search of alternatives long ago. The task for future research is further development and re ﬁning of circular economy indicators in order that they re ﬂect more realistic state of affairs with regard to waste management. Sankey diagram for biowaste and other material ﬂows for individual countries should be produced. As each country has speci ﬁc fea- tures, further research concerning Croatia and other Mediterranean countries should integrate in a holistic manner municipal waste management, food packaging and food waste, marine litter, tourism, local agriculture, and local economies. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper. References Abdel-Shafy, H.I., Mansour, M.S.M., 2018. Solid waste issue: sources, composition, disposal, recycling, and valorization. Egypt. J. Petrol. 27, 1275 e1290. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpe.2018.07.003 . AEA Technology, 2001. Waste management options and climate change. In: Final Report to the European Commission. ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/ pdf/climate_change.pdf . . Caldeira, C., De Laurentis, V., Corrado, S., van Holsteijn, F., Sala, S., 2019. Quanti ﬁ- cation of food waste per product group along the food supply chain in the European Union: a mass ﬂow analysis. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 149, 479 e488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.06.011 .CE Delft, 2017. Biobased Plastics in a Circular Economy. CE Delft. www.cedelft.eu/ publicatie/biobased_plastics_in_a_circular_economy/2022 . Colborn, T., Dumanoski, D., Peterson Myers, J., 1997. Our Stolen Future. Plume . DEFRA, 2011. Applying the waste hierarchy: evidence summary. https://assets. publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ data/ ﬁle/69404/pb13529-waste-hierarchy-summary.pdf . Denison, R.A., 1996. Environmental life-cycle comparisons of recycling, land ﬁlling, and incineration: a review of recent studies. Annu. Rev. Energy Environ. 21, 191e237. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.21.1.191 . DWMA , 2017. MBT is not organic recycling. www.wastematters.eu/uploads/media/DWMA_MBT_is_not_organic_recycling. pdf. . European Commission, 2008. Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 establishing a framework for community action in the ﬁeld of marine environmental policy (Marine Strategy Framework Directive). Orkesterjournalen L 164, 25.26.2008 . European Commission, 2015b. Communication from the commission to the Euro- pean parliament, the council, the European economic and social committee andthe committee of the regions, closing the loop - an EU action plan for the cir- cular economy. COM/2015/0614 ﬁnal. eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html? uri¼cellar:8a8ef5e8-99a0-11e5-b3b7-01aa75ed71a1.0012.02/DOC_ 1&format ¼PDF. European Commission, 2015a. Proposal for a directive of the European parliament and of the council amending directive 2008/98/EC on waste. eur-lex.europa.eu/ legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri ¼CELEX:52015PC0595 &from¼EN. European Commission, 2016. Municipal Waste Compliance Control Exercise. https://doi.org/10.2779/609002 . European Commission, 2017. Our oceans, seas and coasts. ec.europa.eu/ environment/marine/good-environmental-status/descriptor-10/index_en.htm . . European Commission, 2018d. Measuring progress towards circular economy in the European Union ekey indicators for a monitoring framework, accompanying the Communication on a monitoring framework for the circular economy. SWD 17 ﬁnal. ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/ monitoring-framework_staff-working-document.pdf . European Commission, 2018a. The early warning report for Croatia, accompanying the Report on the implementation of EU waste legislation, including the early warning report for Member States at risk of missing the 2020 preparation for re-use/recycling target on municipal waste. SWD 414 ﬁnal. eur-lex. europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri ¼CELEX:52018SC0414 &from¼EN. European Commission, 2018b. A European Strategy for Plastics in a Circular Econ- omy. COM 28 ﬁnal. European Commission, 2018c. Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Reduction of the Impact of Certain Plastic Products on the Environment. COM/2018/340 ﬁnal - 2018/0172  . European Commission, 2019. Country Report Croatia 2019 including an in-depth review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances,accompanying Communication 2019 European Semester: assessment of prog- ress on structural reforms, prevention and correction of macroeconomic im- balances, and results of in-depth reviews under Regulation  No 1176/2011. SWD  1010 ﬁnal, Brussels. ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/ ﬁles/ﬁle_import/ 2019-european-semester-country-report-croatia_en.pdf . European Union, 1999. Council directive 1999/31/EC of 26 April 1999 on the land ﬁll of waste. Orkesterjournalen L 182, 16.17.1999 . European Union, 2008. Directive 2008/98/EC of the European parliament and of the council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing certain directives. Ork- esterjournalen L 312, 3 e30, 22.11.2008 . European Union, 2012. Documents concerning the accession of the republic of Croatia to the European union. Orkesterjournalen L 112, 24.4.2012 . Eurostat, 2019. Circular economy indicators. ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/circular- economy/indicators . . Eurostat, 2019a. Recycling rate of municipal waste. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ rec mw . . Galovi /C19c, M., 2016. Ekonomika gospodarenja otpadom eusporedba 2 sustava gospodarenja otpadom . mzoe.gov.hr/vijesti/plan- gospodarenja-otpadom-2016-2022-ekonomski-prihvatljiviji-od-prijasnjeg-pri-jedloga-4540/4540 . . Government of the Republic of Croatia, 2017. Draft decision on implementation of WMP of the Republic of Croatia for 2017-2022 period. In: 38th Session, 25.5.2017. vlada.gov.hr . Grzesik, K., 2018. The environmental impact of municipal waste management systems. In: E3S Web of Conferences 45. https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/ 20184500020 , 00020 INFRAEKO 2018. HAOP , 2015. Metodologija za odre Civanje sastava i koli /C20cina komunalnog odnosno mije /C20sanog komunalnog otpada. www.haop.hr/sites/default/ ﬁles/uploads/dokumenti/021_otpad/ Projekti/OTP_PR_Metodologija%20za%20odredivanje%20sustava% 20komunalnog%20otpada.pdf . . HAOP , 2018. Report on munic- ipal waste for 2017. www.haop.hr/sites/default/ ﬁles/uploads/dokumenti/021_ otpad/Izvjesca/komunalni/OTP_Izvje /C20s/C19ce%20o%20komunalnom%20otpadu_2017. pdf. . HAOP , 2019. Privremeni podaci o komunalnom otpadu za 2018. godinu. http://www.haop.hr/hr/privremeni- podaci-o-komunalnom-otpadu-za-2018godinu-za-provjeru/privremeni-L.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 12 podaci-o-komunalnom . . HGK , 2019. Trinaesta konferencija o sigurnosti i kvaliteti hrane. https://www.hgk.hr/13-konferencija-o-sigurnosti-i-kvaliteti- hrane-najava . . Hogg, D., 2002. Costs for municipal waste managent in the EU, ﬁnal report to DG environment. ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/studies/pdf/eucostwaste.pdf . JRC EC, 2011. Supporting environmentally sound decisions for biowaste manage- ment. https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/eur-scienti ﬁc-and-technical- research-reports/supporting-environmentally-sound-decisions-biowaste- management-practical-guide-life-cycle accessed 15 3 October 2019. Kumar Ghosh, S., Di Maria, F., 2018. A comparative study of issues, challenges and strategies of biowaste managenent in India and Italy. Detritus 1, 8 e17.https:// doi.org/10.26403/detritus/2018.8 . Larsen, A.W., Merrild, H., Møller, J., Christensen, T.H., 2010. Waste collection systems for recyclables: an environmental and economic assessment for the munici- pality of Aarhus . Waste Manag. 30, 744 e754. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.wasman.2009.10.021 . Luttenberger, A., Runko Luttenberger, L., 2018. Stakeholders in abating marine litter in the Adriatic. In: ICTS 2018 Maritime, Transport and Logistics Science Con- ference, pp. 220 e225. icts.sdzp.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Zbornik- povzetkov-7.6.2018.pdf . Massarutto, A., 2006. Waste management as a service of general economic interest: is the self-suf ﬁciency principle still justi ﬁed?. In: Working Paper No 05-05-eco, FIRB Programme Competition and Regulation Evolution in the Local Utilities Market in Europe . Mayer, A., Haas, W., Wiedenhofer, D., Krausmann, F., Nuss, P., Blengini, G.A., 2019. Measuring progress towards a circular economy: a monitoring framework for economy-wide material loop closing in the EU28. J. Ind. Ecol. 23 , 62e76.https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12809 . Ministry of Agriculture , 2019. Draft food waste prevention plan for 2019 -2022 period. https://esavjetovanja.gov.hr/ECon/MainScreen?entityId ¼1102.1 . Ministry of Environment and Energy , 2019. Draft regulation amending the regulation on municipal waste management, e-savjetovanja. esavjetovanja.gov. hr/ECon/MainScreen?entityId ¼11135 . Ministry of Environment and Energy , 2019a. Proposal amending the Plan of use of funds earned through sale of carbon emission units by auction in the Republic of Croatia till 2020. esavjetovanja.gov.hr/ECon/MainScreen? entityId ¼10799 . Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection of the Republic of Croatia , 2015. Draft Waste Management Plan for 2015-2021 Period. http://mzoe.gov.hr/ nacrt plana 2015-2021 . Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection of the Republic of Croatia , 2016. Draft Waste Management Plan for 2016-2022 Period. http://mzoe.gov.hr/ UserDocsImages/ARHIVA%20DOKUMENATA/SPUO/nadlezno_mzoe/ 02112016_-_nacrt_prijedloga_plana_gospodarenja_otpadom_rh_za_razdoblje_ 2016-2022_godine.pdf . Moraga, G., Huysveld, S., Mathieux, F., Blengini, G.A., Alaerts, L., Van Acker, K., de Meester, S., Dewulf, J., 2019. Circular economy indicators: what do they mea- sure? Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 146, 452 e461. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.resconrec.2019.03.045 . Morris, J., 1996. Recycling versus incineration: an energy conservation analysis. J. Hazard Mater. 47, 277 e293. Morris, J., 2016. Recycle, bury, or burn wood waste biomass?: LCA answer depends on carbon accounting, emissions controls, displaced fuels, and impact costs.J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 844 e856. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12469 .Newman, D., 2009. Biowaste disposal vs. biowaste recovery ethe Italian experi- ence. Value and Recovery efrom waste to resource, presentation. Tehran. www. miteco.gob.es/ca/calidad-y-evaluacion-ambiental/formacion/2_3_David_ Newman-Consortium_Italian_tcm34-136362.pdf . . Republic of Croatia, 2005. Waste Management Strategy. Of ﬁcial Gazette 130/2005 . Republic of Croatia, 2007. Waste Management Plan of the Republic of Croatia for 2007-2013 Period. Of ﬁcial Gazette 85/2007 . Republic of Croatia, 2013. Act on Sustainable Waste Management. Of ﬁcial Gazette 94/13, 73/17 . Republic of Croatia, 2017. Waste Management Plan of the Republic of Croatia for 2017-2022 Period. Of ﬁcial Gazette 3/2017 . Republic of Croatia, 2017a. Regulation on Municipal Waste Management. Of ﬁcial Gazette 50/2017 . Runko Luttenberger, L., 2011. Gospodarenje Vodom I Otpadom. Naklada Kvarner, Rijeka . Runko Luttenberger, L., 2016. Planned waste management concept in the Republic of Croatia. In: Presentation at Country Workshop Realised in Cooperation with the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy and the German-Croatian Chamber of Industry &Commerce on 26-28 October in Zagreb. wasteconcepts.cleaner-production.de/en/laenderaktivitaeten-3/kroatien-2. html . Runko Luttenberger, L., 2018. Challenges in marine litter issues in the Adriatic. J. Marit. Transport. Sci. 89 e103. https://doi.org/10.18048/2018-00.89 . Special edition no.2. Runko Luttenberger, L., 2019. Circular economy and food packaging/food nexus, MATRIB 2019. In: 20th International Conference on Materials. Croatian Society for Materials and Tribology, pp. 197 e205. hdmt.hr/wp-content/uploads/2019/ 06/matrib2019-program.pdf . Scienti ﬁc American, 2011. Does burning garbage to produce electricity make sense? www.scienti ﬁcamerican.com/article/does-burning-garbage-to-produce- energy-make-sense/ . Scott, D.N., 2015. Our Chemical Selves eGender, Toxics, and Environmental Health. UBC Press . Steiner, M., 2005. Status of mechanical-biological treatment of residual waste and utilization of refuse-derived fuels in Europe. In: Conference the Future ofResudual Waste and Utilization of Refuse-Derived Fuels in Europe . Steingraber, S., 2010. Living Downstream, second ed. DaCapo . Tomi /C19c, T., 2019. Energy Recovery of Waste under the In ﬂuence of European Legis- lation. doctoral dissertation. Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Naval Ar- chitecture, University of Zagreb . Tonini, D., Albizzati, P.F., Fruergaard Astrup, T., 2018. Environmental impacts of food waste: learnings and challenges from a case study on UK. Waste Manag. 76,744e 766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.03.032 . June 2018. United Nations , 2007. Domestic material consumption. www.un.org/esa/ sustdev/natlinfo/indicators/methodology_sheets/consumption_production/ domestic_material_consumption.pdf . . United Nations , 2019. Sustainable development goals knowledge platform. sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu ¼1300 . . United Nations Environment Programme , 2019. Solid waste. www. unenvironment.org/explore-topics/resource-ef ﬁciency/what-we-do/cities/ solid-waste-management . . Yale Environment 360, 2013. Incineration Versus Recycling: in Europe, A Debate over trash. e360. yale.edu/features/incineration_versus_recycling__in_europe_ a_debate_over_trash .L.R. Luttenberger / Journal of Cleaner Production 256  120495 13 

