Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/resources-conservation-and-recycling-x Behavioral change for the circular economy: A review with focus on electronic waste management in the EU Keshav Parajulya,b,*, Colin Fitzpatrickb, Orla Muldoonc, Ruediger Kuehra aUnited Nations University, Vice Rectorate in Europe, Sustainable Cycles Programme , Platz der Vereinten Nationen 1, 53113, Bonn, Germany bDept. of Electronic & Computer Engineering, University of Limerick, Limerick, V94 T9PX, Ireland cDept. of Psychology, University of Limerick, Limerick, V94 T9PX, Ireland ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Consumer behavior Circular economyE-wasteWEEEElectronic wasteSustainable consumptionBehavior changeABSTRACT In recent years, electrical and electronic products  have been central to the discussion of resource sustainability due to their growing demand, use of critical resources, and challenges in managing the resultingwaste stream . As such, the concept of circular economy, which seeks to ‘design out ’waste by better products, practices and business models, is deemed to be very relevant for e-products. The nature of circularsystems mandates a collective eﬀ ort of businesses, consumers, and governments. While the techno-economic sides of the circular economy have attracted large attention in recent years, the role of consumer behavior –a critical factor in de ﬁning the long-term success of ‘sustainable production and consumption ’initiatives –remains less explored. In this context, this paper explores the potential of integrating lessons from behavioral sciences tofacilitate circular economy in e-waste management. It o ﬀers a review of prominent behavioral theories and their application in the context of sustainable consumption and pro-environmental behaviors. Finally, the paper identiﬁes opportunities for behavioral interventions in improving e-waste management and in achieving a more circular economy. 1. Introduction 1.1. Background Electrical and electronic products  have been one of the focus areas in the discussion of resource sustainability mainly due to a) their growing demand, b) the use of critical resources, and c) challenges in properly managing the end-of-life  for e-products (known as e- waste) . E-waste is a fast- growing waste stream globally, which with the current trend, is ex-pected to double by 2045 . E-waste is also a mixture of valuable resources and toxic substances that demandscareful handling. E-products have evolved to become complex and ubiquitous in everyday lives but e-waste collection and management systems have not caught up –largely failing to ensure proper handling of e-waste. This entails potential risks of resource losses and negativeimpacts on environment as well as human health . Governments and other actors have taken actions to tackle the growing e-waste problem. In Europe, for example, the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment  Directive sets targets for collectionand subsequent processing of e-waste for material recovery ( European Parliament, 2003 ). The Directive mandates all member states of the European Union to facilitate separate collection of and resource re-covery from e-waste. More importantly, the system based on Extended Producer Responsibility  principle has made producers re- sponsible for their e-products with the aim of improving recyclability and encouraging the integration of EoL aspects during product design . For more than two decades, concepts such as ‘design-for- recycling ’have also been in circulation  and more recently, the European Ecodesign Directive has begun to set design requirements for energy-related products to include all stages of pro- duct lifecycle, including product EoL . The results of these collective e ﬀorts, however, have not been sa- tisfactory. Despite relatively well-established waste management in- frastructure in place, European countries only collect about one third of the generated e-waste under the o ﬃcial collection systems with sig- niﬁcant quantities going to non-compliant waste management channels . As for products themselves, little evidence of design supporting EoL resource recovery exists. Classic design ﬂaws are still found even in modern e-products . Due to their https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcrx.2020.100035 Received 15 August 2019; Received in revised form 20 November 2019; Accepted 24 February 2020⁎Corresponding author at: United Nations University, Vice Rectorate in Europe, Sustainable Cycles Programme , Platz der Vereinten Nationen 1, 53113, Bonn, Germany. E-mail address: parajuly@vie.unu.edu .Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 Available online 25 February 2020 2590-289X/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license  . T complex material composition and design, many e-products are not compatible with material recycling processes, which results in resource losses. As the recycling techniques try to catch up with the ever-ad- vancing product design, ‘Design-for-EoL ’has not been the priority. Overall, the lack of progress is disappointing –considering how much policy development and technological research has taken place. In recent years, the concept of circular economy is deemed in- creasingly relevant in addressing the e-waste problem. Circular economy aims to ‘design out ’waste through optimization of products and materials cycles by keeping them at their highest utility and value with the help of cleaner and re- newable technologies, innovative business models, and policies sup-porting them . Such an optimization can be realized through better-designed products and business models thatallow a) product lifetime extension, b) reuse of products and compo- nents, and c) e ﬃcient material recovery from the EoL products. To begin with, the vision of EPR-based e-waste management system was inline with that of a circular economy as it was believed that by making producers responsible for EoL collection and treatment, they would be incentivized to re-organize business models and product designs to re- duce their EoL costs. The implementation however, has been limited to simply collection and subsequent material recycling processes with collective schemes o ﬀering no incentive for individual actors to im- prove resource recovery. Preparation for reuse of EoL products, whichwould conserve the embodied energy and many critical raw materials that are lost during recycling, is almost non-existent ( Coughlan et al., 2018 ;Parajuly and Wenzel, 2017 ). In the academic discourse on environmental sustainability, the consumption side of the product lifecycle has not always received equalattention as the production side. Most common carbon management frameworks use production-based rather than consumption-based ac- counting . The latter approach assigns emissions to the consumption point of goods and services, which may provide abetter guide for climate policies . This practice, however, is not surprising given the ‘linear’ nature of current economic systems in which production, consumption and EoL management ofconsumer goods are isolated in many regards. In a circular economy,more focus is on the consumption  of artifact as the goal is tomaximize the usefulness and hence the utility of resources ( Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013 ). In this regard, the techno-economic aspects of the circular economy concept has been extensively studied in recent years. However, like in the sustainability debate, the role, mo- tivations, and drivers of end users ’behavior in a circular system has not been equally examined. The social and behavioral elements linked toconsumption of everyday goods, and how they need to be adapted to enable regular people to facilitate the success of a circular system, re- main largely unexplored . In the midst of discussions on technicalities of improved e-waste collection and re-cycling rates, users ’important role in sustainable production and con- sumption of e-products seems to have been neglected ( Otto et al., 2018 ). 1.2. Consumer behavior in a circular economy End-users of e-products  are directly involved in the three key stages of a product lifecycle: purchase, use, and EoL man- agement. Users ’behavior and decision making during these stages have direct implications to the success of not only the most preferred optionsin a circular economy , but also subsequent resource recovery  at the product EoL. Investing in more durable products and/or engaging with circular business models , opting for repair and reuse of functional broken products  andtimely and proper disposal of products with no reuse potential (EoL management) are examples of such consumer behaviors. Because of their interactions to everyday lives, circular strategies seeking to boost resource e ﬃciency (including infrastructure, products, business models and policies) will not succeed without the considera- tion of public acceptance and adaptation ( Cherry et al., 2018 ;van Weelden et al., 2016v ). There are technological as well as economic challenges  to implement aperfect system allowing all users and businesses to engage in the cir- cular economy. While many stakeholders are driven by monetary re- wards and legislative requirements, certain transactions rely on users ’ behaviors (e.g., exploring reuse options, selling second hand, returning Fig. 1. Examples of gap between people ’s claim and actual practices [sources: ( Baldé et al., 2017 ;Cerulli-Harms et al., 2018 ;European Union, 2014 ;Huisman et al., 2017 ;Parajuly and Wenzel, 2017 )].K. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 2 instead of stockpiling, and recycling instead of wrongly discarding). Such behaviors have considerable impact on EoL collection and re- source recovery, and on the success of a circular system for e-products. The majority of Europeans are aware of the environmental issues linked to our consumption model and the importance of e ﬀective use of resources . Many of them also claim to parti- cipate in waste sorting, and to be willing to try reused items or alter- native business models such as leasing . The practices however, do not re ﬂect the claims made by the people. Some examples of the gap between people ’s claims and their actions during purchase, use and EoL of e-products are o ﬀered in Fig. 1. These ex- amples are based on limited available data on consumer behavior and not all of them may be directly comparable to re ﬂect the gaps, never- theless, they o ﬀer a useful insight. For example, at the product EoL, 76 % of Europeans claim that they sort their e-waste but only 35 % of the generated e-waste is collected under o ﬃcial collection systems in the EU. It implies that part of the sorted e-waste is either stockpiled athomes or collected through uno ﬃcial channels. Moreover, these gaps are the outcome not only of consumer choices, but also of available e-waste disposal options and collection systems that are often beyond consumers ’control. Many environmental problems are rooted in human behavior, and behavioral changes are therefore needed to utilize the potential of technological innovations helping environmental sustainability ( Steg and Vlek, 2009). The e ﬃcacy of intervention strategies to promote pro- environmental behavior relying on information campaigns is limited mainly because of the fact that environmental literacy do not ne- cessarily translate into sustainable actions . Human behavior is understood to be linked to both intrinsic as well asextrinsic attributes . In the context of sustainable consumption behavior, intrinsic attributes include knowledge, motiva-tion, beliefs, habits, values, attitudes, intentions and other psycholo- gical variables whereas extrinsic attributes include social and culturalnorms, monetary implications, and contextual variables such as infra- structure and institutional constraints ( Jackson, 2005; Knussen and Yule, 2008 ;Young et al., 2009 ). This paper explores the possibilities and barriers in integrating behavioral insights in sustainable production and consumption initiatives. 2. Method2.1. Scope We study the potential for utilizing behavioral insights in the con- text of circular economy and e-waste. For this, we review prominent behavioral theories, models, and intervention tools that are linked to sustainable consumption and pro-environmental behaviors. The goal is to identify opportunities for implementing behavioral interventions in properly managing e-waste, and in a larger context, in achieving a more circular economy by promoting circular business models, product life- time extension and material recycling. 2.2. Literature review We begin with an attempt to understand existing theories on human behavior and behavioral change from di ﬀerentﬁelds of study including social and behavioral sciences, economics, and psychology. We then closely analyze the literature where these theories are applied in the context of environmental and resource sustainability in order to a) create an overview of behavioral theories linked to sustainable pro-duction and consumption and b) collect examples of behavioral inter- ventions in the context of e-products and circular economy. Google Scholar was used as the primary search tool for the publications using diﬀerent combinations of keywords including ‘behavior ’,‘circular economy ’,‘consumer ’,‘consumption ’,‘e-waste ’,‘pro-environmental ’, ‘sustainable ’, and ‘theory ’. However, the search was not limited to theseterms and a snowball technique was used to identify all relevant lit-erature within the scope of this paper. Since the literature in the ﬁeld of behavioral change for circular economy is limited, we expand our scopebeyond the academic publications. We include academic literature (e.g. peer –reviewed articles, conference proceedings, books chapters, etc.) as well as other publications  in our review. In total, 115 publications were reviewed. A list of reviewed publications on pro-environmental behaviors, linked to waste management in general and speci ﬁcally on e-waste and circular economy, along with their scope is provided as SupplementaryMaterial. 3. Behavioral change The complex nature of human behavior is explained by several theoretical frameworks from varying ﬁelds of study. More than 80 diﬀerent theories of behavior and behavioral change exist across the ﬁeld of psychology, sociology, anthropology and economics ( Darnton, 2008 ;Davis et al., 2015). Widely used in the sector of public health, the use of theory-based behavioral intervention is limited when it comes to promoting pro-environmental behaviors. Most common theories (and models) of pro-environmental behaviors can be grouped as moral, ra-tional choice, and economic models . In addition, nudging and community-based social marketing are two popular in-tervention strategies that make the use of cognitive biases and social inﬂuences, respectively ( McKenzie-Mohr, 2011; Thaler and Sunstein, 2008 ). The following sections brie ﬂy unpack these theories and inter- vention tools, an overview of which is illustrated in Fig. 2 below. 3.1. Rational choice theories Attitude and subjective norms are the main constructs of rational choice theories . The theory of planned behavior  is one of the most popular psychological theories used in theresearch of pro-environmental behavior . It suggests that pro-environmental behaviors are the result of ‘rational choices ’made with the goal of maximizing personal bene ﬁt(Bamberg, 2013 ). Centered on an individual ’s‘intention ’to perform a certain be- havior, the TPB suggests that such intentions can be predicted from attitudes toward the behavior as well as subjective  norms and perceived behavioral control, and the actual behavior is the result of these intentions combined with individual ’s perception of behavioral control . Assuming intention to be the most important factor in behavioral change, the framework of TPB advocates for ‘goal- directed ’behavioral interventions for promoting pro-environmental Fig. 2. Elements of pro-environmental consumer behavior and their connection to the main theories and intervention strategies for behavioral change.K. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 3 intention, and thus, behavior . Past research have tested the e ﬀectiveness of this theory in the domains of circular economy and e-waste management. The TPB has been used as a framework to study, for example, determinants of con- sumers ’e-waste disposal behavior intentions in China ( Wang et al., 2016a ) and Vietnam , willingness to participate in formal e-waste recycling in Nigeria , in- tention-behavior gap in e-waste recycling in Brazil ( Echegaray and Hansstein, 2017), and young adults ’e-waste recycling behavior cross- culturally in China and India . In addition, The will- ingness to participate in e-waste recycling with a points reward system  and through online e-waste recycling plat- forms  were also investigated in China. The TPB has also been used to analyze the key variables underlying the consumers ’ purchase intentions of remanufactured e-products ( Jiménez-Parra et al., 2014 ). The outcome of these studies, which rely mostly on questionnaire surveys for data collection, are mixed. While some suggest that en- vironmental awareness is the most important predictor of e-waste re- cycling behavioral intention , others point to per- ceived behavior control , attitude , and social norms . This suggests a potential indirect in ﬂuence of external factors (possibly demographic and socio- economic factors) in determining e-waste recycling behavior, which may challenge the generalized applicability of the TBP. The famous ‘intention-behavior gap ’–the fact that only few intentions translate into behaviors –is another source of skepticism against founding be- havioral change interventions on the TPB . 3.2. Moral theories Moral norms –descriptive and prescriptive –are a strong driver of pro-environmental practices as well as policies . People in general value environmental quality and accept the respon-sibility to care for it, and environmental campaigns can bene ﬁt more from appealing to people ’s‘positive self-concept ’than their ‘economic self-interest ’. Behavioral change driven by in- trinsic motivators may also be longer lasting than external (e.g. ﬁ- nancial) rewards that seem to dilute the ‘purity ’of an altruistic act ( van der Linden, 2018v ). Altruistic values are positively linked to pro-en- vironmental norms. Beliefs about environmental impacts and the ef- fectiveness of one ’s action come into play between values and norms. These beliefs and norms, and thus the readiness to perform certainaction, can be shaped by information . The value-belief-norms  theory is arguably the most popular of moral theories in investigating pro-environmental behavior (Bronfman et al., 2015; Janmaimool and Denpaiboon, 2016 ;Lopez- Mosquera and Sanchez, 2012). It provides a social-psychological fra-mework for examining normative factors promoting sustainable atti- tude and behaviors, which links personality elements, beliefs about human-environment relations, and the sense of moral obligation to pro- environmental behaviors . The theory suggests that pro-environmental behaviors are more likely to appear when peoplevalue the collective wellbeing over personal interest. The relationship among variables of the VBN theory has been em- pirically studied and veri ﬁed in di ﬀerent settings for addressing varying environmental behaviors  but examples from the e- waste and circular economy domains are limited in both number and scope. The VBN theory was used –in combination with other theories – to evaluate residents ’willingness to participate in e-waste in USA  and to examine consumers ’perceptions towards reuse and recycling of e-products in Finland . However, the available studies do not evaluate the constructs of VBNtheory using statistical analysis and are inconclusive regarding the signiﬁcance of moral constructs in deﬁ ning e-waste and circular economy related behaviors.3.3. Economic models In economics, pro-environmental behaviors are modeled as the ‘private provision of public goods ’. Unlike psy- chological theories, the approach of economic models assumes in- dividuals to be utility-maximizers whose behavior can be in ﬂuenced through incentives . Individuals ’stated will- ingness to pay  for environmental improvements has been widely used as a metric for pro-environmental behavior. Willingness to pay for better management of e-waste and waste in general has been studied in Asian, African and South American countries, where proper infra- structure as well as the ‘polluters-pay ’philosophy are yet to fully de- velop ( Dwivedy and Mittal, 2013 ;Nnorom et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2011 ). There are also examples, though comparatively fewer, from other regions including Northern America and Europe ( Nixon et al., 2009 ;Saphores et al., 2012 ). Willingness to pay a premium for greener and remanufactured products have also been studied for di ﬀerent ca- tegories of e-products ( Atlason et al., 2017; Michaud and Llerena, 2011; Saphores et al., 2007). WTP may vary with socioeconomic factors (demography, education level, income, etc.) . Although aﬃxed to the economic value of outcome of the investment, WTP also reﬂects some degree of altruistic motives and moral values ( Guagnano, 2001 ;Nunes and Schokkaert, 2003). Some have even suggested that environmental attitude and values are stronger predictors of WTP thansocioeconomic characteristics . However, the mar- ketplace behavior of consumers are not always consistent with theirattitude or ethics . Hypothetical bias is also a pronounced issue, which suggest that the WTP preference may varybetween hypothetical and real settings but ﬁndings are not conclusive . 3.4. Community-based social marketing Social marketing exploits the evidence that people are more likely to follow what others do . It is a strategic planning process that uses marketing principles and techniques to in- ﬂuence behavioral changes that bene ﬁt society and the individual . Social marketing is compared with education and law as one of the three major tools for behavioral change with the claim that the toolbox of social marketing has more options than other the- ories and frameworks for behavioral change. A merger of knowledge from psychology and social marketing, community-based social mar- keting  is proposed as a pragmatic alternative to traditional information-intensive campaigns for behavioral change ( McKenzie- Mohr, 2000). The tools used by CBSM include communication, incentives, norming and social di ﬀusion. The CBSM has been studied in the context of, for example, fostering sustainable behavior (paper reduction, com- mingled recycling, purchasing environmentally preferred products) at a university , and promoting waste recycling behavior of households ( Haldeman and Turner, 2009; Linder et al., 2018 ) and of tailgaters in a sporting event . We did notﬁnd any examples of CBSM used in the context of e-waste and circular economy. The CBSM approach is based on social psychology and the idea that behavioral changes are e ﬀective when pushed by ‘real ’people and at community levels .  It provides a ﬁve-step guideline for behavioral change interventions –selecting behaviors, identifying barriers and bene ﬁts, developing strategies, piloting, and implementation and evaluation. Social concern for status is a keytrigger for consumption, and therefore interventions based on social inﬂuence may be e ﬀective in changing consumer behavior (O'Rourke and Lollo, 2015). The resources  requiredfor the interpersonal communication in the CBSM programs has been highlighted as the major issue in implementing this behavioral changeK. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 4 strategy . 3.5. Nudging Nudging is based on the assumption that humans are not exclusively rational beings and do not always act based on their knowledge and intentions because their decision making is often not mindful and can be inﬂuenced by heuristics and biases . People ’s failure to always make rational choices works against the goal of behavioral change frameworks based on the utility-maximization assumption . To address this, two concepts – choice architecture and libertarian paternalism –have been proposed by behavioral economists . Based on these two con- cepts, a ‘nudge ’helps people without compulsion, but ‘paternalizes ’ them with a gentle push towards the ‘right choice ’. In recent years, ‘nudging ’has been increasingly used as an umbrella term and is known as a low-cost solution for promoting pro-environmental behavior . Contrary to other approaches that seek to completely change a be- havior, nudges rely on subtle ques to in ﬂuence on how people act – without them even noticing it. Nudging evolved from the ﬁeld of be- havioral economics, which unlike conventional economic theories, suggests that a) material payo ﬀs are not the sole driver of human be- haviors, b) social norms and context are important motivators, and c)cognitive limitations lead to irrational decisions ( Carlsson and Johansson-Stenman, 2012 ). An example of these elements coming into play is the signi ﬁcant di ﬀerence between ‘willingness to pay ’and ‘willingness to accept ’reported by empirical studies ( Horowitz and McConnell, 2002). Nudges have been tested and reported to be e ﬀective in reducing food waste  and plastic waste ( Rivers et al., 2017), and promoting more expensive green energy ( Ebeling and Lotz, 2015). In the context of e-products, research examples include useof nudge to promote more durable products  and to encourage repair, leasing and purchase of ‘greener ’mobile phones ( Stefansdotter  et al., 2016 ). In both cases, the experimental trials based on simulated situation produced promising results fornudges but their implementation in real-world setting is not known. Nudging is seen as a more rational approach to e ﬃciently address individual behavior in environmental policies ( Gsottbauer and van den Bergh, 2010). There are examples of investigations commissioned bygovernments as well as non-governmental bodies, mainly focusing on the policy aspects of user behavior. However, the initiative of im- plementing evidence-based intervention is still in its infancy. Nudges can be an attractive policy tool because of their low implementation cost  but there is not enough evidence to claim that the process of designing e ﬀective nudges is inexpensive. Nudges are context-speci ﬁc, and not all nudging strategies are equally eﬀective to tackle a particular behavior. For example, ‘defaults ’are proven to be an e ﬀective nudge strategy for promoting green energy, while ‘priming ’–another nudge strategy –is found to have no or even negative e ﬀect . A thorough methodological approach is therefore required to come up with the right nudgingstrategy. There are also controversies and critics of behavioral inter- ventions based on nudging, which is accused of being manipulative and unethical and nudges are even argued to be un ﬁt for tackling society ’s ‘major ills ’such as climate change . 4. Relevance to the circular economy Transition towards a circular economy is not possible without a fundamental change in consumer behaviors regarding green purchase,adaptation to new business models and acceptance of product up- grading that involves repair and remanufacturing . This will require addressing not only the extrinsic attributes , but also intrinsic attributes  of human behavior . Conventional approaches to addressing this issue include initiatives such as information cam-paigns, economic incentives, and stricter regulations, whereas the use of behavioral insight in such initiatives are still rare. We can draw from literature that despite imperfections, behavioral theories and inter- vention tools are useful in addressing these social and psychological factors in order to drive pro-environmental practices. This conveys an optimistic message on the potential for integrating behavioral strategies along the di ﬀerent lifecycle stages of e-products to achieve a more circular economy. 4.1. Challenges and opportunities The gap between circular economy principles and consumer prac- tices may be bridged with the help of behavioral insights without sig- niﬁcantly altering the product lifecycle systems. Behavioral strategies may be used to promote, for example, purchase of ‘green’ products or alternative business models . Similarly, strategies may seek to encourage product reuse and repair for product lifetime ex- tension during the use stage. Finally, at the end of a product ’s life, behavioral interventions can be designed to motivate users and to fa- cilitate timely and proper disposal for better management of e-waste.The understanding of the socio-economic and psychological factors inﬂuencing human behaviors can help designing e ﬀective strategies to engage individuals and businesses in a more circular economy. The opportunities and challenges in implementing behavioral insights during purchase, use, and EoL management are summarized below. 4.1.1. Promoting green products Displaying expected product lifespan as a label on e-products can inﬂuence purchase decisions and the in ﬂuence may vary across dif- ferent products . When designed properly, such labels can be used as a behavioral intervention to achieve the desired outcome . Users were less likely to choose the most energy-e ﬃcient television set when the European energy label was changed from a scale of ‘At oG ’to the scale of ‘A+++to D ’ . This is an example of ‘framing ’,a nudging strategy, with undesired outcome , which may be avoided by carefully using behavioral insights in the process of de-signing interventions. Designing ‘green’ labels for e-products based on lifecycle impact assessment could be a challenging task given the multiplicity of product models and features in di ﬀerent e-products, which makes it di ﬃcult to compare two items. Research also suggests that not all product types are equally associated with ethical issues for consumers. In one study, consumers associated food items most strongly to ethical issues (in- cluding environmental) whereas brown goods (i.e. consumer electro- nics such as TV and stereos) were considered to have the weakest links . Such an issue may pose as a barrier to Fig. 3. Elements of behavioral and techno-economic aspects of the circular economy and potential intervention tools for behavioral change.K. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 5 promoting green e-products because they do not receive equal attention from consumers as, for example, organic food products during pur- chase. In addition, purchase of e-products occur much less frequently compared to other everyday consumer items. This makes it more challenging to develop buying ‘green’ e-products as a pro-environ- mental habit in consumers. 4.1.2. Circular business models Consumer habits and routines formed by linear business models serve as a behavioral barrier in changing the status quo in consumption practices. A transition towards the circular economy will require leveraging the power of both rational  as well as non- rational  motives in order to change consumer habits . This applies for mainstreaming of alternative business models such as leasing for consumer e-products as well as for creatingdemands for refurbished and remanufactured products ( Bittar, 2018; van Weelden et al., 2016v ). Despite the potential economic and environmental bene ﬁts of business models based on remanufacturing and/or product-servicesystem, their adoption in industries are not widespread ( Linder and Williander, 2017). Remanufacturing is especially less common forconsumer products –an issue that cannot be solved by traditional ‘green marketing ’approach without considering behavioral aspects of the buyers . In addition, the design of products and business models needs to expand beyond the physical characteristics inorder to encompass the human aspects of consumption ( Wastling et al., 2018 ). 4.1.3. E-waste management The recast of WEEE Directive has set a new minimum e-waste col- lection target of 65 % (based on the weight of e-products put on the market during the three preceding years) . Many countries in Europe are struggling to meet this new targetwhereas stockpiling of used e-products in households has been a major factor contributing to the lower collection and recycling rates . Improper disposal and stockpiling of EoL pro- ducts can be partly attributed to the lack of ﬂexibility and convenience of the o ﬃcial e-waste collection systems o ﬀered to consumers. Factors such as behavioral costs and environmental motivations at the in-dividual level are therefore important, which may be in ﬂuenced more eﬀectively by social enticements than more costly structural improve- ments . The nature of e-waste poses additional challenges in designing be- havioral interventions compared to other product and waste categories. In some countries, recycling behavior has become a social norm and people may be stigmatized for not recycling their household waste . However, e-waste is a relatively new stream of waste that is usually not discarded with other household waste. E-waste is perceived as valuable and clean, which helps to discount the urgency factor of waste disposal –partly explaining why people don’ t mind stockpiling EoL products at home . Behavioral interventions aiming to improve the e-waste collection situation need to take into account these nuances within the waste collection practice. It is worth mentioning here that the main objective of the WEEE Directive is not only to facilitate recycling, but also to prevent the generation of e-waste, for example, by the means of reuse. The Directive also emphasizes that the recycling and any other form of resource re-covery should occur in a manner that the overall lifecycle impacts of e- products are minimized. It is therefore important to ensure that beha-vioral interventions applied to improve e-waste collection is matchedwith collection and resource recovery infrastructure that are aligned with the goals to preserve, protect and improve the quality of the en- vironment and human health. It is also important to consider the variations in di ﬀerent geo- graphical, cultural and techno-economic settings that have signi ﬁcant inﬂuence on consumer behaviors. E-waste recycling behaviors can varybecause of di ﬀerent ﬁnancial and social enticements in di ﬀerent countries. Structural conditions such as convenience of recycling andthe nature of EoL management systems across di ﬀerent countries and regions also come into play . Moreover, recycling behaviors are shaped by personal norms that vary with peo- ple’s knowledge and beliefs about environmental impacts as well as cultural norms that vary with ethnicity and collective values ( Saphores et al., 2012). These issues, together with the more complex nature of e- waste, need attention in the designing of behavioral interventions to facilitate a more circular economy. 4.2. Policy implications The role of users and impacts of their action in a circular economy have been largely ignored in policy interventions. The European action plan for the Circular Economy  touches upon the need for public awareness campaigns to change behavior, butit does not address the well-known knowledge-action gap or the psy- chological and social aspects of consumption in a circular economy. Two other key European interventions covering e-products –WEEE and Ecodesign Directives –do not include end users in their scopes. On the bright side, although policies traditionally have been focused on ‘reg- ulatory ’tools like taxes and permits, behavioral elements, and the fact that they can be facilitated with business models and infrastructure, are increasingly becoming part of the toolbox for policy making ( OECD, 2017 ). Despite the ongoing debate on ethical issues, nudges are becoming increasingly popular in recent years. Changing defaults, one type ofnudging strategy, has proven its strength as an alternative to economic incentives and has been the go-to tool for behavioral interventions at policy level . The evidence in the favor of nudging for environmental policies is strong, however, the application of these insights is not straightforward and needs to address the complexities of behavioral interventions to be a success . Nudges are known to be cost-ef- fective , can be designed and implemented in diﬀerent forms and they can easily be combined with other theore- tical frameworks of behavioral interventions . Nevertheless, there is no one-size- ﬁts-all behavioral solution to varying problems across the product lifecycle and therefore they require cus-tomized interventions. Finally, although everyday consumers play an important role, a transition towards the circular economy is not possible without the behavioral changes of structural actors. Besides reuse, repair and re- cycling, the circular economy envisages alternative models such as access models or product-service systems that are focused more on fulﬁlling customers ’need than on selling more products ( Reim et al., 2015 ). To achieve this, a collaborative approach from markets, in- stitutions and policy makers is crucial, which requires changes in be- havior of structural actors, namely businesses and governments . The lack of collaboration among stake- holders in the product lifecycle has been identi ﬁed as a signi ﬁcant barrier in building a circular system for e-products in the EU ( Parajuly, 2017 ). A proactive role of businesses and governments is therefore needed to negate the institutional barriers such as inertia and bureau- cracy. 5. Future research There are behavioral scientists/economists and environmental psy- chologists, and then there are engineers and policy makers. There is a gap between the behavioral research and the understanding of the techno-sphere of e-products ’lifecycle. This serves as a major barrier in designing behavioral interventions to promote circular economy for e-products. An awareness of behavioral elements and strategies, com- bined with product lifecycle system knowledge, will allow designingK. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 6 eﬀective interventions. Behavioral interventions without the knowl- edge of techno-economic aspects of circular economy and e-products may produce insu ﬃcient or even opposite results. Behavioral insights alone are not enough, for example, to realize that the change in pur-chasing behavior can yield better environmental results than recycling of products  or to identify the intangible product properties that shape the reuse of e-products . On the other hand, techno-economic models alone are not enough to rea- lize that the factors  behind waste reduction and reuse practice may not be the same as those driving the success of structured recycling schemes . The nature of target behaviors can be di ﬀerent: some meant to last for a long period, while others may be one-o ﬀ. Interventions should try to address behaviors considering the most relevant attributes linked tothem, which may be based on part or the whole of one or more beha- vioral theories. Although solid evidence of its success are not su ﬃcient , nud- ging may carry a unique potential among the available frameworks as a ‘novel ’instrument for behavioral interventions especially at the policy level . Nudges can also be used by other stakeholders to promote actions particularly in situations where less frequent decision-making is required. The potential use of nudging in the context of e-waste and circular economy deserves further in- vestigation. It is important to emphasize that people ’s behaviors are linked to a whole array of infrastructural opportunities and are dictated by their surroundings. Therefore, behavioral change interventions are not only about changing individuals ’consumption habits, but also about creating favorable environments to perform certain actions. Althoughpotentially helpful in drafting e ﬀective policies and designing cost-ef- fective infrastructure for public involvement, use of behavioral insightsin technological solutions for environmental problems is not widely practiced . And even when such in- itiatives are taken, not having a thorough understanding of user be- haviors and the science behind behavioral interventions may lead to poor application with disappointing results and loss of resources used in the initiative . Systematically identifying target outcomes ﬁrst, and then designing behavioral interventions to achieve those context-speci ﬁc targets may be a more realistic strategy than seeking to permanently alter generalconsumers ’attitudes and behaviors concerning circular economy. Identifying right points of intervention in the product lifecycle willrequire a thorough system understanding of product lifecycle and the related techno-economic aspects, whereas designing e ﬀective inter- vention will require socio-behavioral insights. More interdisciplinaryresearch is needed in order to investigate the rationale behind users ’ actions and the signi ﬁcance of user behaviors in product lifecycle and to explore possibilities of matching and in ﬂuencing those behaviors through interventions. In the context of facilitating a more circular economy for e-products, we recommend that the future research should particularly focus on thefollowing aspects of consumer behavior. a Empirically understanding the challenges (intrinsic and extrinsic attributes of consumer behavior) to encourage their participation inthe adoption of more circular business models, repair/reuse prac- tices and proper collection of e-waste: For example, understandingwhy people tend to stockpile used e-products at home instead of discarding them in proper and timely manner. b Establishing a systematic and methodological approach to design and test e ﬀective behavioral intervention tools for promoting de- sired consumer practices. Given the promising prospects of the‘nudging ’strategy, design and testing of better choice architecture could be a focus. c Integrating behavioral elements into national/regional policies on e- waste and using behavioral change strategies in the design of EoLmanagement infrastructure  and businessmodels that seek to facilitate reuse and repair of e-products. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂ u- ence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgement We want to thank Tamar Makov for her feedback on the manuscript. This project has received funding from the Irish Research Council and from the European Union ’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk łodowska-Curie grant agreement No 713279. Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcrx.2020.100035 . References Aadland, D., Caplan, A.J., 2003. Willingness to pay for curbside recycling with detection and mitigation of hypothetical Bias. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 85, 492 –502. Ajzen, I., 1991. The theory of planned behavior. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 50, 179 –211. Allcott, H., Mullainathan, S., 2010. Behavior and energy policy. Science 327, 1204 –1205 . Atasu, A., 2018. Operational perspectives on extended producer responsibility. J. Ind. Ecol. Atlason, R.S., Giacalone, D., Parajuly, K., 2017. Product design in the circular economy: users ’perception of end-of-life scenarios for electrical and electronic appliances. J. Clean. Prod. 168, 1059 –1069 . Balde, C.P., Kuehr, R., Blumenthal, K., Gill, S.F., Kern, M., Micheli, P., Magpantay, E., Huisman, J., 2015. E-waste Statistics: Guidelines on Classi ﬁcations, Reporting and Indicators. United Nations University, IAS - SCYCLE, Bonn, Germany . Baldé, C., Forti, V., Kuehr, R., Stegmann, P., 2017. The Global e-waste Monitor –2017. United Nations University , International Telecommunication Union  & International Solid Waste Association , Bonn/Geneva/Vienna. http:// ewastemonitor.info/ . Bamberg, S., 2013. Changing environmentally harmful behaviors: a stage model of self- regulated behavioral change. J. Environ. Psychol. 34, 151 –159. Barr, S., Guilbert, S., Metcalfe, A., Riley, M., Robinson, G.M., Tudor, T.L., 2013. Beyond recycling: an integrated approach for understanding municipal waste management. Appl. Geogr. 39, 67 –77. Bittar, Ad.V., 2018. Selling remanufactured products: does consumer environmental consciousness matter? J. Clean. Prod. 181, 527 –536. Bolderdijk, J.W., Steg, L., Geller, E.S., Lehman, P.K., Postmes, T., 2012. Comparing the eﬀectiveness of monetary versus moral motives in environmental campaigning. Nat. Clim. Chang. 3, 413 –416. Botetzagias, I., Dima, A.-F., Malesios, C., 2015. Extending the Theory of Planned Behavior in the context of recycling: the role of moral norms and of demographic predictors. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 95, 58 –67. Breivik, K., Armitage, J.M., Wania, F., Jones, K.C., 2014. Tracking the global generation and exports of e-waste. Do existing estimates add up? Environ. Sci. Technol. 48,8735 –8743 . Bronfman, N., Cisternas, P., López-Vázquez, E., Maza, C., Oyanedel, J., 2015. Understanding attitudes and pro-environmental behaviors in a chilean community. Sustainability 7, 14133 –14152 . Byerly, H., Balmford, A., Ferraro, P.J., Hammond Wagner, C., Palchak, E., Polasky, S., Ricketts, T.H., Schwartz, A.J., Fisher, B., 2018. Nudging pro-environmental behavior:evidence and opportunities. Front. Ecol. Environ. 16, 159 –168. Camacho-Otero, J., Boks, C., Pettersen, I., 2018. Consumption in the circular economy: a literature review. Sustainability 10, 2758 . Carlsson, F., Johansson-Stenman, O., 2012. Behavioral economics and environmental policy. Annu. Rev. Resour. Economics 4, 75 –99. Carlsson, F., Martinsson, P., 2001. Do hypothetical and actual marginal willingness to pay diﬀer in choice experiments? J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 41, 179 –192. Casey, K., Lichrou, M., Fitzpatrick, C., 2019. Treasured trash? A consumer perspective on small Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment  divestment in Ireland.Resources, Conservation and Recycling 145, 179 –189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. resconrec.2019.02.015 . Cerulli-Harms, A., Suter, J., Landzaat, W., Duke, C., Diaz, A.R., Porsch, L., Peroz, T., Kettner, S., Thorun, C., Svatikova, K., Vermeulen, J., Smit, T., Dekeulenaer, F., Lucica, E., 2018. Behavioural Study on Consumers ’Engagement in the Circular Economy. European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/ ﬁles/ec_ circular_economy_ ﬁnal_report_0.pdf .K. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 7 Cherry, C., Scott, K., Barrett, J., Pidgeon, N., 2018. Public acceptance of resource-e ﬃ- ciency strategies to mitigate climate change. Nat. Clim. Chang . Cole, E.J., Fieselman, L., 2013. A community ‐based social marketing campaign at Paci ﬁc University Oregon. Int. J. Sustain. High. Educ. 14, 176 –195. Coughlan, D., Fitzpatrick, C., McMahon, M., 2018. Repurposing end of life notebook computers from consumer WEEE as thin client computers –a hybrid end of life strategy for the Circular Economy in electronics. J. Clean. Prod. 192, 809 –820. Darnton, A., 2008. Reference Report: an Overview of Behaviour Change Models and Their Uses. Government Social Research. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ ﬁle/498065/Behaviour_ change_reference_report_tcm6-9697.pdf . Davis, R., Campbell, R., Hildon, Z., Hobbs, L., Michie, S., 2015. Theories of behaviour and behaviour change across the social and behavioural sciences: a scoping review. Health Psychol. Rev. 9, 323 –344. Davis, T., Hennes, E.P., Raymond, L., 2018. Cultural evolution of normative motivations for sustainable behaviour. Nat. Sustain. 1, 218 –224. De Pelsmacker, P., Driesen, L., Rayp, G., 2005. Do consumers care about ethics? Willingness to pay for fair-trade co ﬀee. J. Consum. A ﬀ. 39, 363 –385. Dwivedy, M., Mittal, R.K., 2013. Willingness of residents to participate in e-waste re- cycling in India. Environ. Dev. 6, 48 –68. Ebeling, F., Lotz, S., 2015. Domestic uptake of green energy promoted by opt-out tari ﬀs. Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 868 . Echegaray, F., Hansstein, F.V., 2017. Assessing the intention-behavior gap in electronic waste recycling: the case of Brazil. J. Clean. Prod. 142, 180 –190. EESC, 2016. The In ﬂuence of Lifespan Labelling on Consumers. European Economic and Social Committee, Brussels. https://www.eesc.europa.eu/resources/docs/16_123_ duree-dutilisation-des-produits_complet_en.pdf . Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2013. Towards the Circular Economy : Economic and Business Rationale for an Accelerated Transition. https://www. ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/publications/Ellen-MacArthur- Foundation-Towards-the-Circular-Economy-vol.1.pdf . Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2019. Circular Economy. https://www. ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy . European Commission, 2015. Communication COM  614/2: Closing the Loop –An EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52015DC0614 . European Parliament, 2003. Directive 2002/96/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 on waste electrical and electronic equipment .Oﬀ. J. Eur. Union . European Parliament, 2009. Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesignrequirements for energy-related products . O ﬀ. J. Eur. Union . European Parliament, 2012. Directive 2012/19/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on waste electrical and electronic equipment  . Oﬀ. J. Eur. Union . European Union, 2014. Flash Eurobarometer 388 “Attitudes of Europeans Towards Waste Management and Resource E ﬃciency ”.http://ec.europa.eu/commfronto ﬃce/ publicopinion/ ﬂash/ﬂ_388_en.pdf . Frisk, E., Larson, K.L., 2011. Educating for sustainability: competencies & practices for transformative action. J. Sustain. Educ. 2, 1 –20. Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., Ulgiati, S., 2016. A review on circular economy: the expected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and economic systems. J. Clean. Prod. 114, 11 –32. Goodwin, T., 2012. Why we should reject ‘Nudge ’. Politics 32, 85 –92. Gsottbauer, E., van den Bergh, J.C.J.M., 2010. Environmental policy theory given bounded rationality and other-regarding preferences. Environ. Resour. Econ.  49, 263 –304. Guagnano, G.A., 2001. Altruism and market-like behavior: an analysis of willingness to pay for recycled paper products. Popul. Environ. 22, 425 –438. Habib, K., Parajuly, K., Wenzel, H., 2015. Tracking the ﬂow of resources in electronic waste - the case of end-of-Life computer hard disk drives. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49,12441 –12449 . Haldeman, T., Turner, J.W., 2009. Implementing a community-based social marketing program to increase recycling. Soc. Mar. Q. 15, 114 –127. Horowitz, J.K., McConnell, K.E., 2002. A review of WTA/WTP studies. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 44, 426 –447. Huisman, J., Leroy, P., Tertre, F., Söderman, M.L., Chancerel, P., Cassard, D., Løvik, A.N., Wäger, P., Kushnir, D., Rotter, V.S., Mählitz, P., Herreras, L., Emmerich, J., Hallberg,A., Habib, H., Wagner, M., Downes, S., 2017. Prospecting Secondary Raw Materials in the Urban Mine and Mining Wastes  - Final Report. Brussels, Belgium . Jackson, T., 2005. Motivating Sustainable Consumption: A Review of Evidence on Consumer Behaviour and Behavioural Change : A Report to the SustainableDevelopment Research Network. Centre for Environmental Strategy . Janmaimool, P., Denpaiboon, C., 2016. Evaluating determinants of rural Villagers ’en- gagement in conservation and waste management behaviors based on integrated conceptual framework of Pro-environmental behavior. Life Sci. Soc. Policy 12, 12 . Jiménez-Parra, B., Rubio, S., Vicente-Molina, M.-A., 2014. Key drivers in the behavior of potential consumers of remanufactured products: a study on laptops in Spain. J.Clean. Prod. 85, 488 –496. Kaiser, F.G., Ranney, M., Hartig, T., Bowler, P.A., 1999. Ecological behavior, environ- mental attitude, and feelings of responsibility for the environment. Eur. Psychol. 4, 59–74. Kallbekken, S., Sælen, H., 2013. ‘Nudging ’hotel guests to reduce food waste as a win –win environmental measure. Econ. Lett. 119, 325 –327. Knussen, C., Yule, F., 2008. “I’m not in the habit of recycling ”: the role of habitual be- havior in the disposal of household waste. Environ. Behav. 40, 683 –702.Kosters, M., Van der Heijden, J., 2015. From mechanism to virtue: evaluating Nudge theory. Evaluation 21, 276 –291. Kriwet, A., Zussman, E., Seliger, G., 1995. Systematic integration of design-for-recycling into product design. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 38, 15 –22. Kumar, A., 2019. Exploring young adults ’e-waste recycling behaviour using an extended theory of planned behaviour model: a cross-cultural study. Resour. Conserv. Recycl.141, 378 –389. Le, H.-L., Yamasue, E., Okumura, H., Ishihara, K.N., 2013. Analysis of Intentions to Recycle Electronic Waste  Using the Theory of Planned Behavior: A CaseStudy in Urban Areas of Vietnam. Springer, Japan, Tokyo, pp. 73 –79. Leonard, T.C., 2008. Richard H. Thaler, Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. Const. Political Econ. 19, 356 –360. Liebig, G., Rommel, J., 2014. Active and forced choice for overcoming status quo Bias: a ﬁeld experiment on the adoption of “No junk mail ”stickers in Berlin, Germany. J. Consum. Policy 37, 423 –435. Linder, M., Williander, M., 2017. Circular business model innovation: inherent un- certainties. Bus. Strategy Environ. 26, 182 –196. Linder, N., Lindahl, T., Borgstrom, S., 2018. Using behavioural insights to promote food waste recycling in urban households-evidence from a longitudinal ﬁeld experiment. Front. Psychol. 9, 352 . Lopez-Mosquera, N., Sanchez, M., 2012. Theory of Planned Behavior and the Value- Belief-Norm Theory explaining willingness to pay for a suburban park. J. Environ. Manage. 113, 251 –262. Makov, T., Fishman, T., Chertow, M.R., Blass, V., 2018. What a ﬀects the secondhand value of smartphones: evidence from eBay. J. Ind. Ecol. 23 , 549 –559. Martin, N.T., Ross, S.R., Irwin, R.L., 2015. Utilizing community-based social marketing in a recycling intervention with tailgaters. J. Intercoll. Sport. 8, 57 –81. Martin, V.Y., Weiler, B., Reis, A., Dimmock, K., Scherrer, P., 2017. ‘Doing the right thing ’: How social science can help foster pro-environmental behaviour change in marineprotected areas. Mar. Policy 81, 236 –246. McKenzie-Mohr, D., 2000. Promoting sustainable behavior: an introduction to commu- nity-based social marketing. J. Soc. Issues 56, 543 –554. McKenzie-Mohr, D., 2011. Fostering Sustainable Behavior: An Introduction to Community-Based Social Marketing. New society publishers . Michaud, C., Llerena, D., 2011. Green consumer behaviour: an experimental analysis of willingness to pay for remanufactured products. Bus. Strategy Environ. 20, 408 –420. Momsen, K., Stoerk, T., 2014. From intention to action: Can nudges help consumers to choose renewable energy? Energy Policy 74, 376 –382. Moseley, A., Stoker, G., 2013. Nudging citizens? Prospects and pitfalls confronting a new heuristic. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 79, 4 –10. Nduneseokwu, C., Qu, Y., Appolloni, A., 2017. Factors in ﬂuencing consumers ’intentions to participate in a formal E-Waste collection system: a case study of Onitsha, Nigeria.Sustainability 9, 881 . Nixon, H., Saphores, J.-D.M., Ogunseitan, O.A., Shapiro, A.A., 2009. Understanding preferences for recycling electronic waste in California: the in ﬂuence of environ- mental attitudes and beliefs on willingness to pay. Environ. Behav. 41, 101 –124. Nnorom, I.C., Ohakwe, J., Osibanjo, O., 2009. Survey of willingness of residents to par- ticipate in electronic waste recycling in Nigeria –a case study of mobile phone re- cycling. J. Clean. Prod. 17, 1629 –1637 . Nowakowski, P., 2016. The in ﬂuence of residents ’behaviour on waste electrical and electronic equipment collection e ﬀectiveness. Waste Manage. Res. 34, 1126 –1135 . Nunes, P.A.L.D., Schokkaert, E., 2003. Identifying the warm glow e ﬀect in contingent valuation. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 45, 231 –245. O’Rourke, D., Lollo, N., 2015. Transforming consumption: from decoupling, to behavior change, to system changes for sustainable consumption. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 40, 233 –259. OECD, 2017. Tackling Environmental Problems with the Help of Behavioural Insights. OECD Publishing, Paris. Ölander, F., Thøgersen, J., 2014. Informing versus nudging in environmental policy. J. Consum. Policy 37, 341 –356. Otto, S., Kibbe, A., Henn, L., Hentschke, L., Kaiser, F.G., 2018. The economy of E-waste collection at the individual level: a practice oriented approach of categorizing de-terminants of E-waste collection into behavioral costs and motivation. J. Clean. Prod. 204, 33 –40. Parajuly, K., 2017. Circular Economy in E-Waste Management: Resource Recovery & Design For End-of-Life. University of Southern Denmark . Parajuly, K., Wenzel, H., 2017. Potential for circular economy in household WEEE management. J. Clean. Prod. 151, 272 –285. Parajuly, K., Habib, K., Cimpan, C., Liu, G., Wenzel, H., 2016. End-of-life resource re- covery from emerging electronic products –a case study of robotic vacuum cleaners. J. Clean. Prod. 137, 652 –666. Parajuly, K., Kuehr, R., Awasthi, A.K., Fitzpatrick, C., Lepawsky, J., Smith, E., Widmer, R., Zeng, X., 2019. Future E-Waste Scenarios. StEP , UNU ViE-SCYCLE  &UNEP IETC . https://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:7440/FUTURE_E- WASTE_SCENARIOS_UNU_190829_low_screen.pdf . Planing, P., 2015. Business model innovation in a circular economy reasons for non-ac- ceptance of circular business models. Open J. Bus. Model Innov. 1 . Reim, W., Parida, V., Örtqvist, D., 2015. Product –service Systems  business models and tactics –a systematic literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 97, 61 –75. Rivers, N., Shenstone-Harris, S., Young, N., 2017. Using nudges to reduce waste? The case of Toronto ’s plastic bag levy. J. Environ. Manage. 188, 153 –162. Salazar, G., Mills, M., Verissimo, D., 2019. Qualitative impact evaluation of a social marketing campaign for conservation. Conserv. Biol. 33, 634 –644. Saphores, J.-D.M., Nixon, H., Ogunseitan, O.A., Shapiro, A.A., 2007. California house- holds ’willingness to pay for ‘green ’electronics. J. Environ. Plan. Manage. 50, 113 –133.K. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 8 Saphores, J.-D.M., Ogunseitan, O.A., Shapiro, A.A., 2012. Willingness to engage in a pro- environmental behavior: an analysis of e-waste recycling based on a national survey of U.S. Households. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 60, 49 –63. Schubert, C., 2017. Green nudges: do they work? Are they ethical? Ecol. Econ. 132, 329 –342. Stefansdotter, A., Steen-Knudsen, J., Flack, M., Hansen, P.G., 2016. Nudging for Sustainable Consumption of Electronics Products . Nordic Council ofMinisters . Steg, L., Vlek, C., 2009. Encouraging pro-environmental behaviour: an integrative review and research agenda. J. Environ. Psychol. 29, 309 –317. Steininger, K., Lininger, C., Droege, S., Roser, D., Tomlinson, L., Meyer, L., 2014. Justice and cost e ﬀectiveness of consumption-based versus production-based approaches in the case of unilateral climate policies. Glob. Environ. Chang. Part A 24, 75 –87. Stern, P.C., 2000. New environmental theories: toward a coherent theory of en- vironmentally signi ﬁcant behavior. J. Soc. Issues 56, 407 –424. Stern, P.C., Dietz, T., Abel, T., Guagnano, G.A., Kalof, L., 1999. A value-belief-Norm theory of support for social movements: the case of environmentalism. Hum. Ecol. Rev. 6, 81 –97. Sudmant, A., Gouldson, A., Millward-Hopkins, J., Scott, K., Barrett, J., 2018. Producer cities and consumer cities: using production- and consumption-based carbon accountsto guide climate action in China, the UK, and the US. J. Clean. Prod. 176, 654 –662. Sunstein, C.R., 2015. Behavioural Economics, Consumption and Environmental Protection . Tannenbaum, D., Fox, C.R., Rogers, T., 2017. On the misplaced politics of behavioural policy interventions. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 130 . Thaler, R.H., Sunstein, C.R., 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness. Yale University Press . Thomas, C., Sharp, V., 2013. Understanding the normalisation of recycling behaviour and its implications for other pro-environmental behaviours: a review of social norms andrecycling. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 79, 11 –20. Turaga, R.M.R., Howarth, R.B., Borsuk, M.E., 2010. Pro-environmental behavior. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1185, 211 –224. van der Linden, S., 2018v. Warm glow is associated with low- but not high-costsustainable behaviour. Nat. Sustain. 1, 28 –30. van Weelden, E., Mugge, R., Bakker, C., 2016v. Paving the way towards circular con- sumption: exploring consumer acceptance of refurbished mobile phones in the Dutchmarket. J. Clean. Prod. 113, 743 –754. Vetter, M., Kutzner, F., 2016. Nudge me if you can - how defaults and attitude strength interact to change behavior. Compr. Results Soc. Psychol. 1, 8 –34. Vogtlander, J.G., Scheepens, A.E., Bocken, N.M.P., Peck, D., 2017. Combined analyses of costs, market value and eco-costs in circular business models: eco-e ﬃcient value creation in remanufacturing. J. Remanuf. 7, 1 –17. Wang, Z., Zhang, B., Yin, J., Zhang, X., 2011. Willingness and behavior towards e-waste recycling for residents in Beijing city, China. J. Clean. Prod. 19, 977 –984. Wang, Z., Guo, D., Wang, X., 2016a. Determinants of residents ’e-waste recycling beha- viour intentions: Evidence from China. J. Clean. Prod. 137, 850 –860. Wang, Z., Zhang, B., Guan, D., 2016b. Take responsibility for electronic-waste disposal. Nature 536, 23 –25. Wang, B., Ren, C., Dong, X., Zhang, B., Wang, Z., 2019. Determinants shaping willingness towards on-line recycling behaviour: an empirical study of household e-waste re-cycling in China. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 143, 218 –225. Wastling, T., Charnley, F., Moreno, M., 2018. Design for circular behaviour: considering users in a circular economy. Sustainability 10, 1743 . Wheale, P., Hinton, D., 2007. Ethical consumers in search of markets. Bus. Strategy Environ. 16, 302 –315. Yin, J., Gao, Y., Xu, H., 2014. Survey and analysis of consumers ’behaviour of waste mobile phone recycling in China. J. Clean. Prod. 65, 517 –525. Yla-Mella, J., Keiski, R.L., Pongracz, E., 2015. Electronic waste recovery in Finland: consumers ’perceptions towards recycling and re-use of mobile phones. Waste Manage. 45, 374 –384. Young, W., Hwang, K., McDonald, S., Oates, C.J., 2009. Sustainable consumption: green consumer behaviour when purchasing products. Sustain. Dev n/a-n/a . Zhong, H., Huang, L., 2016. The empirical research on the consumers ’willingness to participate in E-waste recycling with a points reward system. Energy Procedia 104, 475 –480.K. Parajuly, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling: X 6  100035 9 

