Internet of Things -Enabled accountability in source separation of household waste for a circular economy in China Bill Wanga, Muhammad Farooqueb, Ray Y. Zhongc, Abraham Zhangd, Yanping Liue,* aAuckland University of Technology  Business School, AUT University, Auckland, 1142, New Zealand bDepartment of Business Administration, Sukkur IBA University, Sukkur, Pakistan cDepartment of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong dEssex Business School, University of Essex, Essex, UK eBusiness School, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China article info Article history: Received 29 June 2020Received in revised form11 January 2021Accepted 16 March 2021Available online 2 April 2021 Handling editor: Cecilia Maria Villas B ^oas de Almeida Keywords: Internet of thingsSource separationAccountabilitySustainable waste managementSmart waste managementCircular economyabstract Source separation is regarded as a best practice for sustainable waste management, which is essential for a transition to a circular economy to recover value from waste. However, its implementation in China hasfaced many dif ﬁculties which are primarily inherent in the public ’s behaviour towards source separation of household waste. Based on multiple cases of innovative use of the Internet of Things  technologies in China in recent years, this study establishes the concept of IoT-enabled accountability in householdwaste source separation by utilising the lens of accountability theory. Moreover, this research advances several propositions on the multiple dimensions of accountability mechanism to in ﬂuence user behav- iours. The study ’sﬁndings provide guidance to governments, technology providers and waste man- agement organisations on the use of IoT-based technological solutions for sustainable waste management. It stimulates future research on the use of IoT technologies in managing people ’s behaviour in a range of contexts beyond waste management alone. The study contributes to the growing literatureon smart waste management. ©2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Household waste management  has been a major chal- lenge for governments across developing countries. Population growth, rapid urbanisation, economic development, and rising standards of living in cities have greatly increased solid waste generation across the globe , especially in urban areas . These trends pose challenges, partic- ularly for environmental protection and sustainable development. A possible solution to overcome the challenges is to adopt a sus- tainable HWM system in line with the cleaner production  concept and circular economy  philosophy. CP approaches aim to contribute to sustainable development by means of increased production ef ﬁciencies, improved environmental management,and sustainable societal development . The CP approaches are key to achieving the CE vision, in which waste is considered a resource for value recovery ( Veleva et al., 2017 ; Farooque et al., 2019b ). Both CP and CE have received increasing worldwide attention and feature prominently in Chinese and Eu- ropean governmental policies ( McDowall et al., 2017 ;Hens et al., 2018 ;Farooque et al., 2019b ). In the context of sustainable HWM, source separation by the person who disposes of the rubbish has been widely accepted as an ethical behaviour  and best practice for reducing, reusing, and recycling waste ( Karim Ghani et al., 2013 ;Zhang and Wen, 2014b ;Yuan et al., 2016 ). Previous research has analysed and compared various collection systems for source-separated household waste in many developed countries such as Japan , Sweden , and Spain . Relevant studies in China have sug- gested that source separation makes recycling more ef ﬁcient (e.g., better quality compost and recyclables)  and optimises incineration operations .*Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: bill.wang@aut.ac.nz , farooq@iba-suk.edu.pk , zhongzry@hku.hk , abraham.zhang@essex.ac.uk , nkliuyp@nankai.edu.cn . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Cleaner Production journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/l ocate/jclepro https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126773 0959-6526/ ©2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 Furthermore, an increased rate of source separation improves the value recovery from waste ﬂows and facilitates a move towards a CE . China, the world ’s largest generator of municipal solid waste  , has been encouraging source sepa- ration of household solid waste  through policy instruments and directives . In the past two decades, several source separation pilot projects have been carried out in a number of Chinese cities. However, most of these projects have failed except for some very recent projects where accountability mechanisms were integrated through the use of Internet-of-Things  technologies . The extant literature has primarily focused on identifying the factors inhibiting the successful implementation of the earlier pilot projects ( Zhang and Wen, 2014b ;Zeng et al., 2016 ;Xiao et al., 2017 ), instead of understanding the reasons for success in the most recent pilot projects. On the other hand, Knickmeyer  argues that suc- cessful implementation of source separation projects require a deeper understanding of public  behaviours and atti- tudes towards ethical approaches to waste separation ( Xu et al., 2017 ). A number of studies have attempted to identify the ante- cedents , inﬂuencing factors ( Zhang et al., 2017 ), and key determinants  of waste sorting be- haviours at the individual and household levels. However, the behavioural aspects of accountability and ethics has been largely overlooked. While there are many ways to establish accountability mecha- nisms in a given setting, in recent years, the application of IoT technologies has received growing attention . Despite some implementation barriers, the use of smart enabling technologies, including IoT in waste management, has been iden- tiﬁed as one of the pathways towards a CE . In this regard, IoT technologies can offer dual bene ﬁts: they facilitate the establishment of an accountability mechanism and they can also support the transition towards smart waste management for a CE. No prior research exists, as far as the authors of this paper know, that links household waste source separation  with accountability and IoT technologies. This study aims to conceptualise IoT-enabled accountability in HWSS. Inspired by the recent success of implementing IoT tech- nologies in several HWM projects in China, this study addresses a key question: How do IoT technologies enable accountability in HWSS? This paper focuses on residential everyday household waste in typical residential communities in Chinese cities, where many families live in apartment buildings managed by an estate man- agement organisation. The following research objectives drive this paper: RO1: To establish the concept of IoT-enabled accountability in HWSS. RO2: To develop theoretical propositions on the multiple di- mensions of IoT-enabled accountability mechanisms in HWSS. This paper adopts a case study approach to answer the research question and to achieve the research objectives. It presents four cases from different parts of China to establish the concept of IoT- enabled accountability in HWSS. By utilising the lens of account-ability theory, this study is a major departure from the prior liter- ature which has utilised various behavioural theory lenses (such as the theory of planned behaviour) to predict and explain behaviour required for source separation of household waste rather than focusing on ways of shaping this behaviour. By drawing on the multiple dimensions of accountability as a mechanism, this research advances several propositions to provide speci ﬁ c answers to the “how ”type of research question from different perspectives. In addition to offering new theoretical contributions to theliterature on source separation, this paper makes important prac- tical contributions by identifying appropriate solutions to chal- lenging HWM problems that occur in China and in other countries. It also provides insights to researchers and policymakers on how to overcome the behavioural challenges in source separation for sustainable HWM through the innovative use of IoT technologies. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature. Section 3presents the research method and case data. Section 4conducts case analyses and pro- poses several propositions on IoT-enabled accountability. Section 5 discusses the research and practical implications before Section 6 concludes the research. 2. Literature review2.1. Accountability theory Accountability theory explains how the perceived need to justify one ’s behaviours to another party (that has the authority to administer rewards or punishments), causes one to consider and feel accountable for the process by which decisions and judgmentshave been reached . As a result, the likelihood that one will think deeply and systematically about one ’s procedural behaviours increases signi ﬁcantly ( Vance et al., 2015 ). According to Vance et al.  , accountability theory proposes four major dimensions of accountability mechanisms: identi ﬁability, expectation of evaluation, awareness of monitoring, and social presence. Identi ﬁability is the individual ’s“knowledge that his outputs could be linked to him ”(Williams et al., 1981 ,p . 309). Hence, individuals modify their behaviours if they believe their identity might be revealed in the process ( Reicher and Levine, 1994 ).Expectation of evaluation is the belief that one ’s“perfor- mance will be assessed by another  according to some normative ground rules and with some implied consequences ” . This expectation increases so- cially desirable behaviours in individuals ( Lerner and Tetlock, 1999 ; Hochwarter et al., 2007 ).Monitoring is the process of watching or tracking an individual user ’s activities . An aware- ness of monitoring fosters the expectation of evaluation ( Vance et al., 2015 ).Social presence is the awareness of other users in the system . It is widely accepted that individuals exhibit increased conformist behaviour in the presence of another person even when that person is not directly present and cannot be observed . According to Ferris et al.  , the source of accountability may be internal or external to the actor. When individuals perceive internal accountability, the obligation to perform certain behav- iours is caused by the actor ’s own commitment to the behaviour. Hence, no formal control mechanism is required and, rather, in- dividuals act out of a sense of personal control ( Dose and Klimoski, 1995 ). Conversely, under external accountability, actors feel responsible and obligated to perform certain behaviours because they are expected to do so by others. Thus, an external controlsystem would be required to satisfy the accountability demands . Insights from control theories suggest that human actors can only be held accountable if they can understand, predict and in- ﬂuence work processes . In the case of perceived in- ternal accountability, theories suggest that actors should only be held accountable for outcomes if they had the freedom to choose between two or more alternatives and to act in a chosen manner . In this way, individuals feel that they have enough control over the situation to achieve the end results ( Dose and Klimoski, 1995 ). In cases of perceived external accountability,B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 2 however, the expectations must be appropriately structured and explicitly communicated prior to the performance period for actors to assume responsibility ( Dose and Klimoski, 1995 ;Merchant and Otley, 2006 ). During the performance period, the evaluators monitor reports of what the individuals were being held account- able for. Mitchell  argues that, for accountability to have an inﬂuence on behaviour, there is a need to associate a reward or punishment system based on the individual ’s performance. This would make the evaluation process more meaningful to the actors. Thus, behaviour results from control mechanisms, including perceived accountability . 2.2. Accountability and IoT technologies When accountability is used for monitoring and evaluation purposes, IoT technologies are considered to be key enablers of the control capabilities of the actor demanding the accountability . The IoT refers to an integrated network of physical objects that are equip- ped with electronics, software, sensors, actuators, and connectivity functionalities so that they are able to connect and exchange data. IoT technologies can generate large amounts of granular and accurate real-time data automatically ( Brous et al., 2020 ), which is very important in the accountability process. For example, automatic identi ﬁcation and data capture  tech- nology, one of the key elements in IoT, is able to automatically identify objects without human involvement, in order to collect data . IoT technologies make certain aspects of the work process –which previously may have been considered to be inaccessible and opaque –visible and available for analysis. For example, big data powered by IoT tech- nologies  coupled with supply chain an- alytics can be used to discover new insights for better and faster decision-making based on data that was previously inaccessible or unusable . In principle, this characteristic of IoT technologies is well-aligned with the accountability mechanism which attempts to make the invisible visible . How- ever, it is important to evaluate the IoT application used for accountability in the ﬁrst instance, as the extent of control depends on the capacities of the technology in use . 2.3. Accountability and household waste source separation Source separation of household waste is considered an effective method for enhancing recycling and minimising waste ( Chung and Poon, 2001 ). According to Gu et al.  , the recyclable compo- nent of household solid waste may reach up to 89.3%. Hence, increased levels of household-level source separation can facilitate the transition towards CE. Given their huge potential in achieving sustainable development, many developed countries use system- atic and integrated waste source separation programs ( Xu et al., 2017 ). However, low recycling rates of household solid waste have been observed and reported in the extant literature ( Fan et al., 2019 ). For example, the cross-country report of MSW in 32 Euro- pean countries indicates that eight member countries achieved a recycling rate of less than 10%, eleven countries recycle between10% and 20%, seven countries between 20% and 30%, and only six countries achieve material recycling levels that are higher than 30% . Similarly, the recycling rate in the United States is equivalent to 35.2% ( United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2017 ). Until now, most efforts  to improve source-separated collection rate can be classi ﬁed into two main streams. The ﬁrst stream has been focused on exploring charac- teristics of an effective HWSS program, including strategies,methods, practices, and impact assessments (see, for example, Bernstad et al., 2011 ;Rousta et al., 2015 ;Eriksen et al., 2019 ; Pedersen and Manhice, 2020 ). The second stream has been focused on understanding the behavioural factors affecting household waste separation at source, including public assessing, public awareness, opinion, and attitudes (see, for example, Sekito et al., 2013 ;Bernstad, 2014 ;Parizeau et al., 2015 ;Xiao et al., 2017 ). However, technology deployment  for improving source-separated collection rate as evident from the recent successful pilot projects has not been reported in the aca- demic literature. It is also argued that household waste separation at source requires considerable behavioural change and effort from individual households . This is dif ﬁcult to achieve in the absence of a reliable accountability mechanism. The accountability concept has a widespread application across various disciplines, including environmental and social issues that involve multiple stakeholders ( Tomasini Rolando, 2004 ;Parmigiani et al., 2011 ;Spence and Rinaldi, 2014 ).Zakaria  suggests that stakeholder engagement has a great potential to in ﬂuence accountability in complex systems. As a major subset of municipal solid waste management, HWM is a truly complex system withsigniﬁcant environmental and social impacts. It involves multiple stakeholders, including governments, enterprises, non- governmental organisations, waste collectors, residents, and so on . Therefore, stakeholder engagement and inter- action with an effective accountability mechanism become extremely important for the success of HWM source separation projects. 2.4. IoT applications in CE and waste management In transitioning to a CE, IoT technologies can facilitate the management of restorative and regenerative resource ﬂows. IoT is able to help with the collection of data generated from various sensors such as smart meters so that stakeholders across the value chain can be connected . IoT not only provides real-time data, it re ﬂects the consequences of particular actions by stakeholders. Thus, CE models based on IoT-captured data may be established for evaluation throughout the lifecycle of certain products such as smartphones . Recently, researchers and practitioners refer to the concept of a ‘smart CE ’, which is enabled by key technologies such as IoT. Kristoffersen et al.  presented a smart circular strategies framework for manufacturing companies using IoT which is used for aligning activities across the CE and information systems. Its capacity for data collection has led to the wide usage of IoT for supporting the CE in terms of system development and imple- mentation ( Lin et al., 2019 ;Rajput and Singh, 2019 ). Some real-life cases of adopting IoT in CE for sustainability have been reported. For example, Fatimah et al.  introduced an advanced technology like an IoT-based sustainable CE method from Indonesia for a smart waste management system. IoT technology has also been used in waste management ( Hong et al., 2014 ; Medvedev et al., 2015 ;Anagnostopoulos et al., 2017 ) to achieve sustainability in smart cities . Arguably, the information collection ef ﬁciencies and high levels of data sharing that has been achieved through IoT technology has made feasible data-driven decision-making models. Gonz /C19alez-Briones et al.  proposed an agent-based IoT platform to encourage citi- zen participation in recycling tasks through gami ﬁcation mecha- nisms. The work was mainly motivated by the lack of a common method of waste management in the European Union. Similarly, ‘Heat Wave Mitigation in M /C19etropole de Lyon ’, reported by Robert et al.  , is a recent example of an IoT-enabled smart city. This example is based on the European Union Horizon 2020B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 3 program, aiming to improve the interoperability between a number of system components. Kang et al.  discussed the applica- bility of an IoT-enabled smart collection system to manage house- hold e-waste in the Malaysian e-waste recycling sector. This system improves the ef ﬁciency and effectiveness of household waste management in terms of saving time and maximising the uti- lisation of equipment such as trucks. Centenaro et al.  introduced some IoT scenarios for typical smart city applications in terms of ef ﬁciency, effectiveness, and architectural design. Hong et al.  presented an IoT-enabled smart garbage system, piloted in Seoul, the Republic of Korea, for ef ﬁcient food waste management. The system was capable of exchanging the IoT- captured data using wireless mesh networks, and the data could be analysed for service provisioning. Anagnostopoulos et al.  discussed the challenges and opportunities of waste management in the IoT-enabled smart cities based on a survey study in the city of St. Petersburg, Russia. They focused on IoT-enabled smart devices and proposed a novel framework for waste management. Wen et al.  presented a case study of an IoT network system for restaurant food waste management in Suzhou, China. This system has been running for some years and has achieved signi ﬁcant beneﬁts, including a 20.5% increase in food waste collection. 2.5. Research gaps A thorough review of the literature suggests that IoT-enabled accountability for sustainable HWSS is an emerging research topic. The following research gaps were identi ﬁed, which moti- vated the authors to conduct this research. 1. In the extant literature, HWSS is highly regarded as an effective method for recovering value from waste ﬂows and facilitating the transition towards a CE. Despite an abundance of research on HWSS, the low rate of HWSS is a commonly reported issue in many countries including China, which is the context of the current study. Evidence from very recent pilot projects suggests that technology deployment  has played a signiﬁcant role in improving the source-separated collection rate. However, such cases have not been reported in the aca- demic literature. 2. Most of the research efforts to date have been put into pre- dicting and explaining the behaviour required for source sepa- ration of household waste. Invariably, the questions such as “what shapes an ethical HWSS behaviour ”and “how does technology deployment shape an ethical HWSS behaviour ” remain unexplored. 3. The majority of the source separation pilot projects carried out in several Chinese cities in the last decade or so have failed to be effective except for some very recent projects where account- ability mechanisms were integrated through IoT technologies. However, IoT technologies ’role in enabling accountability in HWSS remains unclear in the literature. 3. Research method and data Fig. 1 outlines the methodological procedures of the research. This study adopts a qualitative research approach using multiple case studies for two reasons. First, there is scant research exploring IoT-enabled accountability in HWSS, although IoT technologies and accountability have been studied separately. In focusing on how IoT technologies enable accountability in HWSS in China, this study aims to contextualise, interpret and understand the innermechanism through inductive reasoning in order to generate a new theory . Qualitative research methods, such as mul- tiple case studies, are appropriate for this under-investigated topic, as case studies can “present data of real-life situations and provide better insights into the detailed behaviour of the subjects of in- terest ”. Second, HWSS has emerged as a major challenge for many countries across the world, including developed countries such as Japan, Germany, and the United States. Since 1997, China has attempted to implement HWSS systems, but most of the pilot projects had achieved poor results , except for some trials of IoT smart HWSS systems in the last four years. Given the limited evidence of successful HWSS projects in China to date, there is a need to adopt a more exploratory approach, for which a qualitative method is more suitable. Following the replication methodological logic, multiple case studies can either predict similar case results to strengthen the emerging theory, or generate contrasting results to extend theory . As advised by Eisenhardt  , the researchers selected four cases which were suf ﬁcient for generalising empirical ﬁndings while avoiding the data complexity resulting from too many cases. 3.1. Case selection Case selection was purposive and theoretically directed ( Strauss and Corbin, 1998 ) based on the following criteria:  the geographic setting: considering China has a vast territory, cases were selected to represent major areas including the east coast , the capital city in the northern area , the western area , and the southern area ;  successful out- comes: the researchers selected cases which have successfully strengthened accountability;  the system had to be in practice for a minimum of three years. Table 1 summarises the main char- acteristics of the four cases. Pro ﬁles of each case are provided below. Case A. In 2012, a source separation project started in the Huachuan residential community, Ningbo. Despite source separa- tion promotion and education campaigns, a breakthrough in changing the residents ’waste disposal behaviours did not occur until IoT technology was introduced. Since 2016, 2D barcodes unique to each household in the residential community have been printed on all rubbish bags. A database was established to track the user of each rubbish bag. Every morning at 8 a.m., a community worker visits the rubbish collection point to conduct a sampling Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of research methodology.B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 4 check of about 50 e80 rubbish bags on source separation. He uses an app installed on a smartphone to scan the 2D barcodes on the rubbish bags to identify the owners. If any noncompliance is identi ﬁed in rubbish sorting, the community management acts to re-educate the noncompliant users. Some volunteers from the community have also been actively involved in educating and assisting their neighbours in source separation. The IoT-enabled system rewards credit points to compliant residents. The commu- nity management regularly gives awards to the best-performing households and publicizes the names of winners. Because of the accountability achieved through the innovative use of IoTtechnology, the source separation rate has steadily improved, reaching above 70% in less than two years. Case B. An IoT source separation project started at Xinyi Homes residential community, East-City, Beijing in 2018. Governmental organisations such as street agencies, administrative of ﬁces, and enforcement departments work together to advance the project. They run education campaigns to promote the source separation project by using an IoT system for different users: smartphone users can download a “separation ”application to register their identi ﬁ- cations  while non-smartphone users can register their IDs from a local street agency and obtain a barcode card. When disposing ofTable 1 Summary of case pro ﬁle. Case Role of stakeholders such as local council, community, andvolunteersWaste classi ﬁcationAccountability for source separation Positive and negative incentives Results Case A : Ningbo,Eastern China /C15Implement “Regulations on the Management of DomesticWastes in Ningbo. ” /C15Train residents to improve their awareness of the signiﬁcance of waste sorting and to cultivate the habit ofwaste sorting. /C15Educate and re-educate non- compliant users based onsample checking andinspection./C15Hazardous /C15Recyclable /C15Kitchen waste /C15Other/C15Each household has a unique 2D barcode on the rubbish bagswhich can be traced back. /C15Inspectors select 50 e80 bags randomly every day to check whether waste is correctly sortedor not. /C15Inspectors trace back the noncompliant residents byscanning the 2D barcode on therubbish bags. /C15Community workers and volunteers help educate and assist the residents in source separation./C15Invest in infrastructure and provide free rubbish bagswith 2D barcodes. /C15Educate, criticise, and even ﬁne non-compliant residents up to RMB200. /C15Regularly reward the best- performing households andpublicise the names ofwinners./C15More than 70% of household waste has been separatedproperly. /C15More than 75% of residents have actively participated in the project. Case B : East-City Beijing Capital cityNorthern China /C15Implement “Beijing Municipal Solid Waste ManagementRegulations Amendment ”. /C15Government organisations such as street agencies,administrative of ﬁces, and enforcement departments work together to promote andenforce the project. /C15 Run education campaign forsmartphone users and non-smartphone users./C15Hazardous /C15Recyclable /C15Kitchen /C15Other/C15Residents can register as IoT HWSS users by using a smartphone app,or getting a barcode card from thelocal neighbourhood committee;then scan their smartphone orbarcode card to dispose waste. /C15Waste collectors can receive the full-load warning to empty thecontainers and to transport wasteto treatment centre in a timelyfashion. The temperature detec-tion, ozone sterilisation, and anexternal cigarette box can effec-tively keep the container from burning due to cigarette butts./C15Fine up to RMB200 for non- compliant residents. /C15Reward credit based on the correctness of waste sortingand weight of sorted waste.The online supervision and monitoring system have been set upsuccessfully. Case C : Sichuan,Western China/C15Implement “Chengdu Domestic Waste ManagementRegulations ” /C15Street neighbourhood committee and LongquanyiDistrict coordinated and supported the project./C15Paper /C15Plastic /C15Metal /C15ClothingThree application layers: /C15The front-end layer for source separation links residents with thediscarded waste. /C15The middle layer links collectors with waste collection and transportation. /C15The back-end layer is for waste treatment and value recovery./C15Fine up to RMB200 for non- compliant residents. /C15Reward residents cash/credit based on the correct disposaland weight of sorted waste.The household waste recycling rate now reaches around 35%.The system has signi ﬁcantly improved the awareness of sourceseparation of household waste. Ithas cultivated in residents a good habit of separating household waste. Case D : LuohuShenzhenSouthern China Luohu District council has deployed 63 smart recyclingsystems in 61 residentialcommunities./C15Glass /C15Metal /C15Plastic /C15Paper /C15Clothing /C15Kitchen waste /C15Other/C15Use smartphone app or register for a low-carbon ID card for personalidenti ﬁcation. The smart system weighs the sorted waste and awards credits accordingly to the resident ’s account. /C15Its cloud-based platform can monitor in real-time source sepa-ration activities, waste collectiontruck utilisation, and aid betterdecision making in waste collec-tion activities. /C15Data in the system inform policymaking and management decisions./C15Combination of legal penalties and rewards byimplementing “Shenzhen City Domestic WasteClassi ﬁcation and Reduction Management Measures .” /C15Criticise, educate, and ﬁne non-compliant residents upto 200RMB. /C15Reward residents low-carbon credits based on the correctdisposal and weight of sortedwaste.Residents were guided to classify waste correctly. The rewardsmotivated many residents toparticipate in source separation withenthusiasm; good results were achieved in a short time period.B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 5 rubbish, registered users need to scan their ID barcodes on the collection station to open the correct bin as per the waste type. Then the system weighs the waste and rewards the users with credit points. Non-registered users can press a button to dispose of their rubbish but they have no way to receive reward credit points. The system also has other functions, including full-load warning, multi-function display, an intelligent placement device, an anti- pinch nozzle, temperature detection, positioning, LCD publicity screen, ozone sterilisation, and an external cigarette box. By applying both an administrative approach and a smart IoT system, Beijing City has been able to conduct online supervision and monitoring of waste separation activities successfully. Case C .An IoT-enabled smart recycling system called “Panda ” has been on trial in a residential community in Chengdu, Sichuan since November 2018. The “Panda ”has three application layers: the front-end layer, the middle layer, and the back-end layer. The front- end layer enables residents to use a smartphone to scan a barcode on the recycling station for disposing sorted waste. Residents can get cash rewards based on the correctness of waste sorting and the weight of sorted waste. The middle layer coordinates garbage collection and transportation activities. The back-end layer con-solidates and centralises the further processing of sorted waste to recover value. The whole system can help residents to sort garbage based on material  and it also customises collection projects based on the demand and ar- ranges pick-ups from home. The innovativeness and intelligence of the system have been well recognised by the residents. The local street neighbourhood committees have been coordinating and supporting the project. Case D. Since August 2017, Luohu, Shenzhen City has deployed 63 smart IoT machines in 61 residential communities. Before disposing household waste, a resident needs to verify their identity by using smartphone to scan a 2D barcode on the machine (a non- smartphone user can scan his/her low-carbon card from the system to verify their identity). Then, the machine will open its collection door. The smart equipment can recognise the waste type (glass, metal, plastics, paper, textile, kitchen waste, and other) and weigh the waste and reward the compliant resident with credits. The credits earned can be used for shopping in the local markets and can even be withdrawn as cash from local banks. The system runs on a cloud-based platform. It can monitor whether the IoT collec- tion containers have been fully loaded or not. The fully loaded IoT containers can automatically send signals to the control centre for arranging timely collection. It can also improve route management by tracking how trucks collect the waste from stations. 3.2. Data collection, validation, and analysis This research uses secondary data. Secondary data has its dis- advantages because it has been collected by others for different purposes but for the context of this study, it offers relevant infor- mation to address the research questions posed and it enables a means of understanding and explaining the research problem at hand  The objective of exploring how IoT technologies enable accountability in HWSS is served by the data drawn from over ten reliable sources for each case (see the accompanying Supplementary Data). The collected data elaborate the entire process ﬂow and illustrate how IoT systems can compel the accountability of residents and collectors in HWSS. The data also show how stakeholders, such as the government and its respective organisations, help to train, educate, re-educate, reward and/or punish to enforce the accountability of residents in IoT HWSS systems. Validity and reliability tests have also been performed in this study. In terms of constructive validity, multiple sources ofevidence were applied to triangulate the data, including webpages describing the IoT systems, and of governmental and semi- governmental organisations, in addition to catalogues and maga- zines articles . The draft report was also reviewed by four researchers. Internal validity was enhanced through  a clear research framework ;  dis- cussing the ﬁndings among the researchers;  triangulating to conﬁrm the emerging ﬁndings; and  re ﬁning the theoretical orientation of the research. External validity is improved by  rationale for the case selection ;  details of the case study context;  the case study being guided by the accountability theory (refer to section 2.1 ); and  comparing across the four case studies. The development of the case study database (refer to the accompanying Supplementary Data) also serves to enhance the reliability of this study ’sﬁndings. The data coding and analysis proceeded through two main phases. Firstly, the researchers searched more than ten secondary data sources for each case and scrutinised them to identify the conceptual themes that emerged. Then, the researchers with Chi- nese and English language skills analysed the descriptive tran- scripts and coded for conceptual content on the identi ﬁed themes including accountability, reward, and punishment. Data analysis was an iterative process between reviewing theoretical concepts and identifying patterns in the case data. Finally, the results were analysed and synthesised into case ﬁndings. 4. Case analysis and research propositions The four IoT HWSS cases  have been analysed and Fig. 2 provides an overview how the six resulting propositions have been induced and synthesised into a theoretical framework. The framework integrates multiple dimensions of IoT-enabled accountability and depicts the relationships between the account- ability dimensions. The detail of the induction is described as follows. Although the four cases  differ from each other in their location, sample populations, history, and the technologies used, there are some commonalities which can be drawn for an accountability related study . The four cases involve different levels and complexities of technology usage, however, all of these cases share a common denominator: the necessity of education and monitoring from governmental workers and volunteers to implement IoT HWSS systems. Since IoT HWSS systems are new in their philosophy, design, processing, and administration, residents need to become familiar with the system they are required to use. Residents are compelled to change their old habits and to form new habits in using the IoT HWSS system. Education and re-education can help residents to become familiar with the disposal processes of the new Fig. 2. Theoretical framework of IoT-enabled accountability.B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 6 system and to correct wrong behaviour. Meanwhile, monitoring can affect past behaviour, attitudes, normative beliefs, and perceived control . From an accountability the- ory perspective Vance et al.  , the identi ﬁability factor could encourage residents to better educate themselves about the new IoT system and related administration; the monitoring from stakeholders can foster the expectation of evaluation and related social presence to modify the residents ’disposal behaviour. Therefore, education and monitoring are the necessary pre- conditions for using IoT to establish accountability. Thus, the following proposition is proposed. P1. Education and monitoring of residents are preconditions for IoT-enabled accountability in household waste source separation . The success of HWSS depends greatly on its two responsible stakeholders (residents who dispose waste, and collectors who transit the waste) at the front end. Since the traditional HWSS system has its innate imperfections with pre-separation collector bins, the system ’s capacity to succeed relies heavily on residents ’ accountability to put the waste into the right bins. Waste that is incorrectly sorted may be the result of certain behaviour-related attributes, such as carelessness, ignorance, lack of education, etc. Moreover, a lack of effective onsite supervision and administrative systems to incentivise the desired behaviours also undermine at- tempts to hold residents accountable, which leads to the poor levels of performance reported. A case study of Suzhou, China indicatedthat 43% of the respondents thought they knew how to source- separate waste, but only 29% of them actually source-separated waste accurately .A system enabled by IoT technologies, however, can avoid such ﬂaws. With IoT-enabled HWSS, the resident needs to scan their family ID-related barcode, or QR code, to open the correct bin in order to dispose of the waste. In this way, the IoT system can easily link the residents ’identities with their waste disposal behaviours, thus improving their identi ﬁability  which, according to accountability theory , shapes their behaviour. The IoT system can immediately detect if the waste has been disposed of accurately. Also, it simultaneously records the disposal data such as disposal time, weight, category, accuracy, as well as the corresponding reward or credit. All infor- mation can be checked at the IoT HWSS online system by residents using devices such as smartphones and computers. Meanwhile, the internal motivation of residents to sort waste can be reinforced by a reward system: the correct separation behaviour can gain credits as a bonus. Consequently, a reward system can train and educate residents to improve their awareness of expectations of evaluation  and commitment . With the passage of time, residents ’waste disposal behaviour can be changed, and their accountability can be strengthened. This leads to the following proposition. P2. IoT systems can enable residents ’accountability in HWSS by changing their waste disposal behaviour. The other key entity in a HWSS system is the waste collection stations . In the traditional HWSS system, the collectors receive the discarded waste at temporary depots and passively waitfor instructions or orders from the waste management company to empty the bins and redirect the waste for appropriate treatment. Since this traditional HWSS system was designed based on aTable 2 Comparison of the selected cases. Commonalities $Implement local government Regulations on the Management of Domestic Wastes. $Train residents to improve the awareness of the signi ﬁcance of garbage sorting and to cultivate the habit of waste sorting. $Educate and re-educate the noncompliant users based on sample checking and inspection. $All stakeholders work together to promote and enforce the project. $Fine up to RMB200 for non-compliant residents. Differences Case Waste classi ﬁcation Technology application Processing Reward A hazardous, recyclable, kitchen waste, otherPreliminary IoT system: hand scan 2D barcodeon rubbish bagGovernment invests in infrastructure and provides free rubbish bags with 2D barcodes. Each household has a unique 2D barcode on therubbish bags which can be traced back. Inspectors select 50 e80 bags randomly every day to check whether waste is correctly sorted or not; Inspectors trace back the noncompliant residents by scanningthe 2D barcode on the rubbish bags.Regularly gives rewards to the best- performing households and publicizesthe names of winners. B hazardous, recyclable, kitchen waste, otherAdvanced IoT system Residents can register as IoT HWSS users by using a smartphone app, or getting a barcode card from the local neighbourhoodcommittee; Residents need to scan their smartphone or barcodecard to dispose waste; Waste collectors can receive the full-load warning to empty the containers and to transport waste to treatment centres in a timely fashion. The temperature detection,ozone sterilisation, and an external cigarette box can effectivelykeep the container from burning due to cigarette butts.Reward credit based on the correctness of waste sorting andweight of sorted waste. C paper, plastic, metal, clothingAdvanced IoT system Three application layers: the front-end layer for source separation links residents with the discarded waste, the middle layer linkscollectors with waste collection and transportation, the back-endlayer is for waste treatment and value recovery. Residents need to scan their smartphone or barcode card to dispose waste.Reward residents cash/credit based on the correct disposal and weight ofsorted waste. D glass, metal, plastic, paper, clothing,kitchen waste, otherAdvanced IoT system Use smartphone app or register for a low-carbon ID card for personal identi ﬁcation. The smart system weighs the sorted waste and awards credits accordingly to the resident ’s account. Its cloud- based platform can monitor in real-time source separation activities,waste collection truck utilisation, and aid better decision making inwaste collection activities.Reward residents low-carbon credits based on the correct disposal andweight of sorted waste.B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 7 stationary concept –that is, to collect waste in a pre-set geographic area at a pre-set time –it lacks the ﬂexibility to deposit and clear the waste on time. Meanwhile, the collectors ’capacity remains underutilised or, at other times, insuf ﬁcient to meet the actual HWSS requirement in the clearance cycle. Since the amount of waste pro- duced is signi ﬁcantly affected by many factors such as seasons, weather, festivals, parties, holidays etc., the traditional system suf- fers from low ef ﬁciency, poor performance, delayed operation, and/ or under-optimisation. To arti ﬁcially maintain the HWSS account- ability levels, the collectors ’bins in some communities are even locked when administrative supervision is not available. The IoT-enabled HWSS system, however, has been designed to have the dynamic ability to detect the real-time ﬁll level informa- tion of rubbish bins and to notify the backend waste management company to clear the bins in time. The backend operations can also analyse each collector ’s information and optimise the collection and transport capacity in the whole area. With the real-time data and monitoring mechanism provided by the IoT systems, the col- lectors have no excuse of not achieving a high level of ﬂexibility and efﬁciency in their waste collection operations. According to accountability theory, such visibility in the operations enhances theexpectation of evaluation which, in turn, increases the collectors ’ accountability . Therefore, the following propo- sition is proposed: P3. IoT systems can augment the collectors ’accountability in HWSS by providing real-time visibility in their operations. The accountability of the residents and the accountability of the collectors interact with each other. Firstly, the residents ’account- ability is the prerequisite for the collectors to achieve their accountability. If the residents do not feel accountable in correctly sorting their waste, the collectors will not be able to realise their accountability, regardless of how advanced and smart the systems are. Indeed, there have been cases of residents whose lack of accountability have directly impacted on the collectors ’account- ability. For example, many rubbish bins are burnt in China each year due to irresponsible disposals of cigarette butts. 1The collectors, however, can also be regarded as a type of external source of accountability for the residents . The account- ability of the collectors is the necessary condition for the residents to achieve their accountability as it prompts residents to feel comfortable and con ﬁdent that they can control the waste disposal results  given an increase in the expec- tation of evaluation and social presence to satisfy their demands of accountability . The success of HWSS systems relies on the positive interactions between residents and collectors and their respective account- abilities. While traditional systems fail to achieve this interaction because of their limitations in system design, IoT HWSS systems are able to promote the interaction based on their inherent smart systems. When residents discard the waste into collectors ’bins, IoT HWSS systems can detect the accuracy of the sorting from the residents. IoT HWSS systems can also measure the real-time situ- ation of the ﬁll rate of collectors ’bins; that is, when the “bins full ” warning is triggered and sent to the control centre, the centre will assign the waste clearing team to empty the bins in a timely manner. Thus, residents can dispose of their waste without anylimitations related to time of disposal or bins ’capacity. In fact, the less internal accountability is present in the residents, the greater the need to use external accountability, which can be effectively enabled by IoT. Based on the above discussion, the following proposition is proposed:P4. IoT systems can lead to positive interactions between the residents ’accountability and the collectors ’accountability. Nearly all the residents understand the importance and signif- icance of HWSS to the environment, but this does not necessarily translate to their correct separation and disposal of waste since good intentions may be forgotten . Since habits are forms of goal-directed automatic behaviour ( Aarts and Dijksterhuis, 2000 ), the waste disposal habits of residents can be changed to achieve certain goals. Behaviour is the reaction of stimulation from the external environment ( Weiner, 2010 ;Gneezy et al., 2011 ). If the result from the incentive is bene ﬁcial to oneself, the behaviour will be strengthened and repeated; if not, the behaviour will fail to be sustained. Although punishment can pre- vent the enactment of undesirable behaviours, it cannot encourage desired behaviours and can instil resistance and boredom in the punished . Rewards, however, can increase one ’s intrinsic motivation and sense of self-determination, depending on what is required of one to perform . Reward and punishment incentives, however, can only work when there is support from all stakeholders, in this case, the gov- ernment, local council bodies, the community, and the residentialcommittee. This is because reward incentives need strong ﬁnancial support from the government. For example, Shenzhen spends more than 60 million RMB in rewards each year. 2Equally, punishment mechanisms can only work when the system is supervised and implemented by all the stakeholders involved. Reward and punishment incentives are less effective if they operate in isolation –a successful system normally involves both dimensions to simultaneously reward appropriate and punish inappropriate behaviour . If the lens of accountability theory is applied here, the moulding of desired be- haviours by residents can be explained in the following way: pos- itive and negative incentives instil recognition in residents that their disposal behaviour has consequences ; residents ’expectations of having their disposal behaviour contin- ually evaluated are raised and normalised ( Lerner and Tetlock, 1999 ); and ﬁnally, the desired behaviour is reinforced through the perceived social presence of others . Indeed, the four cases  examined in this study proves that a combination of reward and punishment systems in IoT-enabled accountability is more effective for motivating the public to participate in source separation of household waste, and to form correct behaviour, especially in the early stages. One testimony is as follows: “The close combination of the rules and reward incentives is a highlight of our waste sorting work in Luohu District, and it is also a magic weapon for us to achieve the goal of waste sorting work. ” Wenzhi Lin (Deputy Director of Luohu District Urban Manage- ment Bureau, Case D). Once residents acquire the desired behaviour of correctly sort- ing waste, incentives may play a less signi ﬁcant role but can still reinforce the desired behaviour. Therefore, the following proposi- tion is advanced: P5.IoT-enabled accountability can be most effective by applying both positive and negative incentives in the early stage imple- mentation. Incentives, however, may be gradually phased out once residents have formed the habit of sorting rubbish. The accountability of the residents, however, may weaken if 1http://news.stcn.com/2019/1109/15486935.shtml (9 Nov 2019, Reporter: Yahua Sun).2http://news.stcn.com/2019/1109/15486935.shtml (9 Nov 2019, Reporter: Yahua Sun).B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 8 they were to perceive a reduction in the system ’s capacity to identify users, or if the level of ongoing scrutiny that they have come to expect is somehow lessened over time . The continuation of an accountability mechanism to shape and sustain desired behaviours relies on the collaboration of all stake- holders, including administrative supervision from the national government, city council, community, non-governmental organi- sations, media organisations, and volunteers. In the four IoT- enabled source separation projects examined in this paper, the government has played a central role, even though the projects are established in different regions of China with different economic and cultural backgrounds. When implementing IoT-enabled source separation in a residential community, only the local government and its agencies have the authority, resources, and power to employ its legal and administration system to enforce compliance. After an IoT-enabled system is in place, there are on-going requirements to educate residents, to monitor the participation of residents, and to give rewards and penalties to sustain the positive behavioural change in the public. The effort involved in managing and admin- istering this programme may initially form and consolidate the residents ’accountability for an initial period but long-term accountability requires an IoT system to make the HWSS work sustainable and durable. This leads to the next proposition: P6. To sustain a source separation programme over the long term, all the involved stakeholders must cooperate to play their roles; IoT can facilitate such ef ﬁcacy by providing a platform to operationalise the processes and to enable accountability effec- tively and ef ﬁciently . 5. Discussion 5.1. Theoretical implications This study makes a theoretical contribution by establishing the concept of IoT-enabled accountability and its multiple dimensions. From a systems perspective, a traceability service offers great support to establish accountability. In the extant literature, most of the traceability applications are associated with non-human ob- jects. However, waste separation behaviour requires effort from individuals as proper household waste separation is essential for the achievement of a CE . This is where the accountability principle becomes important as it deals with human participants and often incorporates rewards and penalties to reshape behaviour. Although the importance of people ’s behaviour is widely recognised ( Zhuang et al., 2008 ;Bernstad, 2014 ;Zhang and Wen, 2014b ), little research has investigated the role of IoT in bringing about a behavioural change in a source separation and CE context. This study advances the ﬁeld by moving beyond IoT-enabled traceability to IoT-enabled accountability. IoT-enabled accountability is not only useful for waste man- agement, but for any contexts where it would be bene ﬁcial to hold human participants accountable. For example, IoT has been used to track the location and speed of automobile vehicles. Applications can be developed for monitoring drivers, holding them accountable for irresponsible driving behaviours. On a manufacturing shop ﬂoor, IoT can be used to trace which workers perform certain pro- cess steps. If defects and quality issues are a concern, accountability applications can be developed for monitoring individual workers ’ quality performance. There is great potential for IoT technology providers to market IoT-enabled accountability applications, and future research can explore innovative marketing mechanisms. The IoT-enabled source separation mechanism presented in thisresearch contributes to the rapidly-growing literature on smart waste management. Smart waste management is a relatively new concept  that offers a promising future but also faces many challenges . An IoT- enabled source separation mechanism could overcome a major challenge that is prevalent in many countries: speci ﬁcally, the major obstacle to source separation posed by the culture and the public ’s behaviours. This is in line with the ﬁndings of Zhang et al.  that a lack of environmental education and a culture that is not oriented towards environmental protection is a key cause of barriers to smart waste management for a CE in China. 5.2. Practical implications The general propositions advanced from the case studies on IoT- enabled accountability have extensive practical implications for implementing source separation of waste. Propositions 2 e4 sug- gest that IoT systems can enable the accountability of waste gen- erators  and waste collectors, as well as supporting and enabling positive interaction between their respective account- abilities. The case studies show that it is technically feasible to trace the households which dispose of bagged rubbish in a residential community and to hold them accountable for their waste disposal behaviour. In the past, there lacked an ef ﬁcient means to identify noncompliant citizens with regard to correct source separation of household waste. However, the advancement of IoT technology could be a game-changer to enforce accountability in household waste source separation. Similarly, the IoT system enables the accountability of waste collectors by providing real-time ﬁll rate information to the waste management companies operating at the backend. The data generated by the IoT system would not only be useful in optimising the waste collection systems already in place, the data could also be used to design the new source separation projects as part of the nation-wide expansion of the proposed IoT- enabled source separation program. Theﬁfth proposition suggests that a combination of positive  and negative  incentives should be applied to effectively and ef ﬁciently implement IoT-enabled source separation. Employing a “positive ”or a “negative ”reinforcement approach alone cannot fully achieve the desired outcome. For example, Shanghai City in China recently started to enforce the very stringent “Regulations on the Management of Household Waste ”from the July 1, 2019. An individual may be ﬁned 50 to 200 RMB, and an organisation may be ﬁned up to 50,000 RMB for an infringement of the regulation. On the 1st July, 623 organisations were ﬁned in Shanghai . The determination of the Shanghai government is commendable. However, the Shanghai government faces the key challenge of identifying non-compliant citizens. The long-term effectiveness of using punishment alone to enforce source separation also remains questionable. In light of the case study ﬁndings, an IoT-enabled HWM system can help to accurately and ef ﬁciently identify non-compliant citizens. The researchers recommend a combination of a “positive ”and “negative ”rein- forcement approach in the early stages of implementing IoT- enabled accountability, which is more likely to achieve a long term and sustainable change in the waste disposal behaviours of the public. Lastly, the sixth proposition suggests that all the involved stakeholders must cooperate to play their roles in order to sustain the IoT-enabled source separation programme over the long term. Despite having a long history of piloting various source separation projects and promoting CE nationwide, the Chinese enforcement ofB. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 9 environmental regulations has been considered weak ( Farooque et al., 2019a ;Zhang et al., 2019 ). With the introduction of IoT- enabled accountability for source separation, the Chinese govern- ment and policymakers now have a reliable and robust evidence base on which they can con ﬁdently enforce legislation on compulsory source separation. It is now time for the Chinese gov- ernment to unify the waste separation and management standards, to make more strategic investments in supporting infrastructure and systems, and to develop speci ﬁc guidelines and educate the public about them. The resulting changes would have signi ﬁcant impact on China ’s sustainable development. Of course, there is a need for policy-makers to consider potential privacy issues in IoT- enabled applications to secure data and channel accesses to pre- vent the misuse of data . Residential communities and their estate management need to play an important role in enforcing source separation. With the rapid progress of urbanisation in China, more and more people have moved to cities, where they live in residential communities. Their estate management bears the responsibility of managing the household waste that is discarded. They charge the residents a fee for their services. However, their traditional role is simply to co-ordinate rubbish collection by the waste management organisa- tions and to keep the estate clean and tidy. The sorting of rubbish, if done at all, is undertaken by local waste management organisa- tions. To implement an IoT-enabled source separation mechanism, the estate management needs to be equipped with IoT technology and deploy manpower to monitor residents ’compliance in prac- tising source separation. They also need to tailor training programs, awards, and penalties for their estates to optimise the likelihood of successful implementation. Waste management organisations need to shift their opera- tional focus from land ﬁlls to value recovery from waste based on CE philosophy. Because about 60% of the household waste is food waste, there will be a great need to invest in food waste treatment facilities after implementing source separation. These facilities need to be capable of using food waste to generate biogas, organic fertiliser, and protein feed. It is advisable for waste management organisations to collaborate with a wide range of industry sectors to maximise value recovery. As an example, textile materials may be recycled to produce insulation products for the construction sector . 6. Conclusions Many countries have faced serious challenges in managing ever- increasing household waste. The challenges are especially dif ﬁcult for developing countries due to rapid urbanisation and population growth. Source separation in line with the philosophies of CP and CE is a best practice for sustainable waste management. However, it has been little practised in China and many other developing countries due to complex issues with infrastructure, culture, envi- ronmental education, and the public ’s waste disposal habits. The lack of accountability for these habits has been a major obstacle to enforcing source separation by the households which dispose of rubbish. This research addresses this challenge by investigating the role of IoT technologies in some of the most recent source separa- tion projects, which have achieved considerable success. In establishing the concept of IoT-enabled accountability by studying multiple cases of innovative use of IoT technologies in very recent years in China, this paper offers a number of original con- tributions. Earlier studies on source separation in China focused on the inhibiting factors which undermined many earlier pilot pro- jects; comparatively, this research reveals the reasons for success insome of the more recent projects. Earlier studies have also reported IoT-enabled traceability applications, but the use of IoT to achieve accountability in managing human behaviour is a new research topic, which warrants further studies. Furthermore, this paper ad- vances six theoretical propositions which explain the multiple di- mensions of IoT-enabled accountability. This study ’s results have signi ﬁcant practical implications. IoT- enabled accountability in HWM contributes towards the develop- ment and adoption of CP technologies for improving environmental sustainability. The results of this study are of global signi ﬁcance because more and more countries are grappling with the challenge of HWM. The underlying mechanism of IoT-enabled accountabilitythat is demonstrated by the case studies outlined in this paper offer guidance to other countries that are facing similar challenges in reshaping their citizens ’waste disposal behaviours. This paper has its limitations, of which one is its narrowed focus on accountability. Although lack of accountability is a key barrier to a successful source separation program, there are many other barriers that also need to be overcome, including issues in infra- structure and legislation. There is scope for future studies to investigate such other relevant factors. Moreover, the context of thestudy is limited to China. Given that waste disposal behaviours are inﬂuenced by culture, it is worthwhile to broaden the scope of the research to different cultural contexts. Future studies should also investigate ways of determining the ideal levels of reward and punishment in order to reshape people ’s behaviour effectively. A reward that is too small will be insuf ﬁcient to change people ’s behaviour, while overly generous rewards will lead to excessive costs in the long run. Quantitative research is required in the design of the right reward/penalty scheme in order to elicit the desired behaviours. CRediT authorship contribution statement Bill Wang: Methodology, Investigation, Writing eoriginal draft, Writing ereview &editing. Muhammad Farooque: Writing e original draft, Writing ereview &editing. Ray Y. Zhong: Concep- tualization, Writing eoriginal draft. Abraham Zhang: Conceptu- alization, Writing eoriginal draft, Writing ereview &editing, Project administration. Yanping Liu: Investigation, Data curation, Writing ereview &editing, Funding acquisition. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgments This work is supported by the National Social Science Fund of China . The authors also appreciate the support from Seed Fund for Basic Research in the University of Hong Kong . Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126773 . Supplementary Data: Sources of Cases A eD Case A Ningbo 2D barcodes.B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 10 Case B Beijing smart waste separation system.Source Type Language Available at Publication timeMain contents 1 China.com.cn Central GovernmentNews WebsiteChinese andEnglishhttp://zjnews.china.com.cn/ yuanchuan/2016-03-03/59135.html4 March 2016CCoverage of domestic waste sorting collection in urban area of Ningbo this year will reach 70%. CQR real-name registration system covering the whole of this year is expected in August with the QR kitchen garbage bags into the thou- sands of households 2 People.cn Central GovernmentNews WebsiteChinese http://zj.people.com.cn/n2/2017/ 0407/c186327-29986020.html7 April 2017CThe quality of performance of HWSS in Ningbo increased around 20% due to the implication of 2D barcode system since 2015. 3 CCTV.com Central GovernmentNews VideoChinese http://news.cctv.com/2017/04/10/ VIDEbqkxVHI6arPlf2j885Ef170410.shtml10 April 2017CThe quality of performance of HWSS in Ningbo increased around 20% due to the implication of 2D barcodes system since 2015. 4 Shanghai XinminEvening NewsNewspaper Chinese http://xmwb.xinmin.cn/html/ 2018&ndash;09/20/content_12_2. htm20 September2018CNingbo City ranked top 3 in HWSS Evaluation among 46 main cities in China. CIntroduction to the HWSS process in Ningbo CHow to use 2D barcodes in HWSS and the requirements for residents in Ningbo 5 Cnnb.com.cn Local governmentwebsiteChinese http://www.cnnb.com.cn/xinwen/ system/2019/06/20/030061151.shtml13 June 2019CRegulations of Ningbo Municipal People ’s Government on classi ﬁcation management of household waste 6 Zhejiang NewsLocal GovernmentNews WebsiteChinese http://zjnews.zjol.com.cn/zjnews/ nbnews/201906/t20190613_10325453.shtml31 June 2019C2D barcode can trace to each house. CViolation behaviors in HWSS will get punished. CFirst ticket for violation was issued in Ningbo. 7 Cnnb.com.cn Local governmentwebsiteChinese http://news.cnnb.com.cn/system/ 2019/08/02/030073603.shtml2 August 2019CProblems and future directions in HWSS in Ningbo City 8 zjol.com.cn Local News WebsiteChinese http://zjnews.zjol.com.cn/zjnews/ zjxw/201910/t20191029_ 11270990.shtml29 October 2019CAI and camera technologies are engaged in HWSS in Ningbo 9Zhengce LiaowangJournal Chinese Article Title: Ningbo City has Achieved Periodical Progress inHWSS2019 : 29e31.CThe achievements and measures in HWSS in Ningbo City. CThe use of 2D Barcodes in HWSS. 10 Cnnb.com.cn Local governmentwebsiteChinese http://news.cnnb.com.cn/system/ 2020/06/11/030160825.shtml11 June 2020COne case of violation in HWSS is under investigation and prosecution. CThe violator was sourced with the 2D Barcode system. Source Type Language Available at Publication timeMain contents 1 Cnr.cn Central Government News WebsiteChinese http://pic.cnr.cn/pic/yc/20170815/ t20170815_523901340.shtml#27 April 2017CTrial running of Intelligent waste separation in Beijing eEasteCity CPoints can be engaged to exchange rice and sesame oil. 2 The People ’s Government of Beijing MunicipalityLocal GovernmentChinese http://www.beijing.gov.cn/zhengce/ zhengcefagui/201905/t20190522_60749.html10 November2017COpinions of the general of ﬁce of Beijing Municipal People ’s Government on accelerating the classi ﬁcation of domestic waste CBeijing municipal solid waste classi ﬁcation and treatment action plan  3 Beijing Evening Newspaper Chinese https://www.takefoto.cn/viewnews- 1753785.html10 April 2019CHow to use the intelligent waste source separation bin. CWaste collectors can receive the full-load warning to timely empty the containers. CThe future widespread plan. 4 The Beijing News Newspaper Chinese https://www.sohu.com/a/306964820_ 11498810 April 2019CThe functions of the intelligent waste separation bin. CInterview speech from one vice director in the local Street of ﬁce. 5 xinhuanet.com Central GovernmentNews WebsiteChinese http://www.xinhuanet.com/info/ 2019&ndash;04/11/c_137967326.htm11 April 2019CIntroduction to the ﬁrst intelligent waste source separation bin. CResidence can register the HWSS by using smartphone app, or getting barcode card. 6 Sohu.com National News WebsiteChinese https://www.sohu.com/a/308689734_ 67784318 April 2019CThe weighting and alarming function of the intelligent waste bin. C HWSS whole process supervision system. 7 The Beijing News Newspaper Chinese http://www.chinanews.com/sh/2019/ 07&ndash;06/8885713.shtml6 July 2019 CThe usage of Intelligent waste bin by local residents in ﬁve communities CFully coverage of HWSS, and different ways of earning points. 8 Standing Committee of Beijing Municipal People ’s CongressLocal governmentwebsiteChinese http://www.bjchp.gov.cn/cpqzf/ xxgkzl/fdzdgknr/lzyj/zj63/sgzjd65/5291985/index.html27 November2019CRegulations of Beijing Municipality on the administration of domestic waste CTheﬁrst local law on domestic waste in China. 9 The Beijing News Newspaper Chinese http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/ 2020&ndash;05/05/c_1125942761. htm5 May 2020 CSpecialized inspection on HWSS in Beijing City CThe problems existing in HWSS in Beijing and the responses and further instruments. 10 Bejing Daily Newspaper Chinese http://www.cac.gov.cn/2020 &ndash; 05/21/c_1591608628870329.htm21 May 2020CAI technology is engaged in Beijing ’sH W S S CNew intelligent waste bin with the functions of auto- sourcing, auto-sensing, auto-classi ﬁcation etc. 11 Case C Sichuan smart recycling system in Chengdu. Case D Shenzhen smart household waste separation.Source Type Language Available at Publication timeMain contents 1 chengdu.gov.cn Local governmentwebsiteChinese http://gk.chengdu.gov.cn/govInfoPub/detail.action? id¼98402 &amp;tn ¼626 April 2108CImplementation scheme of household waste classi ﬁcation in Chengdu  2 Southwest today Local new websiteChinese https://www.jinrixinan.com/archives/13627.html 3 December 2018CIntroduction to the “Panda ”HWSS and “IoTþ_ Intelligent Recycle ”mode in Chengdu. 3 Sichuan Daily Newspaper Chinese http://scnews.newssc.org/system/20181214/ 000929613.html14 December2018CIntelligent waste separation bins are put into use in Chengdu City. CEvery household is allocated a 2D barcode, which is used for waste bags. CResidents can get points and exchange for daily life articles. 4 e.chengdu.cn E-newspaper Chinese https://e.chengdu.cn/html/2018 &ndash;12/17/ content_639975.htm#17 December 2018CIntroduction to the Intelligent HWSS system. CProblems existed during the past 6 months ’ running. 5 Sohu.com National news websiteChinese https://www.sohu.com/a/327874631_100262126 19 July 2019CIntroduction to the “Panda ”HWSS recycle bins. 6 newssc.org Local news websiteChinese http://cd.newssc.org/system/20191206/002812887. html6 December 2019CIntroduction to the Intelligent HWSS system in Chengdu. CThe functions of the system includes auto weighing and auto-recording. CBoth 2D barcode and public transportation card are included in the system. 7 News.chengdu.cn Local new website Chinese http://news.chengdu.cn/2019/0605/2053450.shtml 5 June 2019 CIntroduction to the “Internet þHWSS ”mode in Chengdu. 8 People ’s Daily Central GovernmentNewspaperChinese http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2020 &ndash; 01/03/nw.D110000renmrb_20200103_4 &ndash;14. htm3 January 2020CIntroduction to the intelligent HWSS in Chengdu. 9 Sohu.com National new websiteChinese https://www.sohu.com/a/365336548_100027152 7 January 2020CIntroduction to what ’s the intelligent HWSS management and how to promote it in Chengdu? 10 Chengdu Daily Local newspaperChinese http://www.cdrb.com.cn/epaper/cdrbpc/202004/02/ c59488.html2 April 2020CCompany ’s actions in HWSS in Chengdu. CHow the 2D barcode and RFID technologies are engaged in HWSS in Chengdu. Source Type Language Available at Publication timeMain contents 1 Shenzhen Evening NewsNewspaper Chinese http://info.clean.hc360.com/2013/07/ 010942217161.shtml1 July 2013 CShenzhen Municipal Solid Waste Classi ﬁcation Management Service Centre is set up, which istheﬁrst one in China. 2 Suhu.com National new websiteChinese https://www.sohu.com/a/163146099_355807 8 August 2017CIntroduction to the HWSS and intelligent rubbish bins in Luohu district, Shenzhen. 3 Guangming Ribao Central governmentnewspaperChinese http://news.gmw.cn/2018 &ndash;06/21/content_ 29368397.htm21 June 2018CIoT technology in HWSS in Luohu district, Shenzhen. 4 Cankaoxiaoxi.com National news websiteChinese http://www.cankaoxiaoxi.com/ ﬁnance/20170428/ 1944112.shtml28 April 2017CIntroduction to the “IoTþCommunity Intelligent HWSS ”bin. C2 barcode, GPS, temperature sensing, solar energy charging and other technologies are engaged. 5 sznews.com Local news websiteChinese http://www.sznews.com/news/content/ 2018&ndash;08/21/content_19913062.htm21 August 2018CComments from the residents on intelligent waste separation facilities in Shenzhen. 6 Shenzhen Evening NewsNewspaper Chinese http://shenzhen.sina.cn/news/s/2018-12-20/detail- ihmutuee0867783.d.html?vt ¼4&amp; fromsinago ¼pugeqsra20 December2018CThe measures to handle household waste issue in Shenzhen. 7 Shenzhen City AdministrationBureauLocal governmentwebsiteChinese http://www.xhjjxh.cn/news/show-3-1404.htm 8 January 2019CHWSS in 2018 in Shenzhen City CAchievements and problems in HWSS. 8 Sohu.com National news website Chinese https://www.sohu.com/a/299421254_100014482 6 March 2019CShenzhen Invest over 60 million RMB to build the ﬁrst HWSS and intelligent collection project. 9 Sohu.com National news websiteChinese https://www.sohu.com/a/325110508_120060823 4 July 2019 CIntroduction to the intelligent HWSS system in Shenzhen. 10 cgj.sz.gov.cn Local governmentwebsiteChinese http://cgj.sz.gov.cn/ydmh/zcg/content/post_ 7900073.html7 July 2020 CRegulations of Shenzhen Municipality on classi ﬁed management of domestic waste CIoT, Intelligent and other technologies will be further introduced in HWSS.B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 12 References Aarts, H., Dijksterhuis, A., 2000. Habits as knowledge structures: Automaticity in goal-directed behavior. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 78 , 53 e63. Al-Turjman, F., Alturjman, S., 2018. Con ﬁdential smart-sensing framework in the IoT era. J. Supercomput. 74 , 5187 e5198 . Al-Turjman, F., Ever, E., Zahmatkesh, H., 2019. Small cells in the forthcoming 5G/IoT: Trafﬁc modelling and deployment overview. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 21 , 28 e65. Alcayaga, A., Wiener, M., Hansen, E.G., 2019. Towards a framework of smart-circular systems: an integrative literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 221, 622 e634. Anagnostopoulos, T., Zaslavsky, A., Kolomvatsos, K., Medvedev, A., Amirian, P., Morley, J., Hadjieftymiades, S., 2017. Challenges and opportunities of wastemanagement in IoT-enabled smart cities: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Sus- tainable Computing 2 , 275 e289. Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., 2010. The internet of things: a survey. Comput. Network. 54 , 2787 e2805 . Bernstad, A., 2014. Household food waste separation behavior and the importance of convenience. Waste Manag. 34 , 1317 e1323 . Bernstad, A., la Cour Jansen, J., Aspegren, H., 2011. Local strategies for ef ﬁcient management of solid household waste ethe full-scale Augustenborg experi- ment. Waste Manag. Res. 30 , 200 e212. Beu, D., Buckley, M.R., 2001. The hypothesized relationship between accountability and ethical behavior. J. Bus. Ethics 34 , 57 e73. Bond, C.F., Titus, L.J., 1983. Social facilitation: a meta-analysis of 241 studies. Psychol. Bull. 94 , 265 e292. Boos, D., Guenter, H., Grote, G., Kinder, K., 2013. Controllable accountabilities: the Internet of Things and its challenges for organisations. Behav. Inf. Technol. 32 , 449 e467. Bose, I., Ngai, E.W.T., Teo, T.S.H., Spiekermann, S., 2009. Managing RFID projects in organizations. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 18 , 534 e540. Brous, P., Janssen, M., Herder, P., 2020. The dual effects of the Internet of Things : a systematic review of the bene ﬁts and risks of IoT adoption by organi- zations. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 51, 101952 . Centenaro, M., Vangelista, L., Zanella, A., Zorzi, M., 2016. Long-range communica- tions in unlicensed bands: the rising stars in the IoT and smart city scenarios. IEEE Wireless Communications 23 , 60 e67. Chung, S.S., Poon, C.S., 2001. A comparison of waste-reduction practices and new environmental paradigm of rural and urban Chinese citizens. J. Environ. Manag. 62 , 3 e19. Dahl /C19en, L., Vukicevic, S., Meijer, J.-E., Lagerkvist, A., 2007. Comparison of different collection systems for sorted household waste in Sweden. Waste Manag. 27, 1298 e1305 . Dose, J.J., Klimoski, R.J., 1995. Doing the right thing in the workplace: responsibility in the face of accountability. Empl. Responsib. Rights J. 8 , 35 e 56. Eisenberger, R., Pierce, W.D., Cameron, J., 1999. Effects of reward on intrinsic motivation dnegative, neutral, and positive: comment on Deci, Koestner, and Ryan . Psychol. Bull. 125 , 677 e691. Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Acad. Manag. Rev. 14 , 532 e550. Erdogan, B., Sparrowe, R.T., Liden, R.C., Dunegan, K.J., 2004. Implications of orga- nizational exchanges for accountability theory. Hum. Resour. Manag. Rev. 14 , 19e45. Eriksen, M.K., Damgaard, A., Boldrin, A., Astrup, T.F., 2019. Quality assessment and circularity potential of recovery systems for household plastic waste. J. Ind. Ecol. 23 , 156 e168. European Environment Agency, 2013. Managing Municipal Solid Waste- a Review of Achievements in 32 European Countries. https://www.eea.europa.eu/ publications/managing-municipal-solid-waste . . Fan, B., Yang, W., Shen, X., 2019. A comparison study of ‘motiva- tioneintention ebehavior ’model on household solid waste sorting in China and Singapore. J. Clean. Prod. 211, 442 e454. Farooque, M., Zhang, A., Liu, Y., 2019a. Barriers to circular food supply chains in China. Supply Chain Manag.: Int. J. 24 , 677 e696. Farooque, M., Zhang, A., Thürer, M., Qu, T., Huisingh, D., 2019b. Circular supply chain management: a de ﬁnition and structured literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 228, 882e900. Fatimah, Y.A., Govindan, K., Murniningsih, R., Setiawan, A., 2020. Industry 4.0 based sustainable circular economy approach for smart waste management system to achieve sustainable development goals: a case study of Indonesia. J. Clean. Prod. 269, 122263 . Ferris, G.R., Mitchell, T.R., Canavan, P.J., Frink, D.D., Hopper, H., 1995. Accountability in human resource systems. In: Ferris, G.R., Rosen, S.D., Barnum, D.T. , Handbook of Human Resource Management. Blackwell Publishers, Oxford, UK, pp. 175 e196. Gallardo, A., Bovea, M.D., Colomer, F.J., Prades, M., 2012. Analysis of collection systems for sorted household waste in Spain. Waste Manag. 32 , 1623 e1633 . Gallardo, A., Bovea, M.D., Colomer, F.J., Prades, M., Carlos, M., 2010. Comparison of different collection systems for sorted household waste in Spain. Waste Manag. 30 , 2430 e2439 . Ghauri, P., Gronhaug, K., 2005. Research Methods in Business Studies: a Practical Guide. Financial Times Prentice Hall . Gneezy, U., Meier, S., Rey-Biel, P., 2011. When and why incentives  Work to Modify Behavior. J. Econ. Perspect. 25 , 191 e210.Gonz /C19alez-Briones, A., Chamoso, P., Casado-Vara, R., Rivas, A., Omatu, S., Corchado, J.M., 2020. Internet of Things Platform to Encourage Recycling in a Smart City. In: Hashmi, S., Choudhury, I.A. , Encyclopedia of Renewable and Sustainable Materials. Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 414 e423. Grifﬁth, T.L., 1993. Monitoring and Performance: A Comparison of Computer and Supervisor Monitoring. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 23 , 549 e572. Grote, G., 2009. Management of Uncertainty: Theory and Application in the Design of Systems and Organizations. Springer Science &Business Media . Gu, B., Wang, H., Chen, Z., Jiang, S., Zhu, W., Liu, M., Chen, Y., Wu, Y., He, S., Cheng, R., Yang, J., Bi, J., 2015. Characterization, quanti ﬁcation and management of household solid waste: A case study in China. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 98, 67e75. Hens, L., Block, C., Cabello-Eras, J.J., Sagastume-Gutierez, A., Garcia-Lorenzo, D., Chamorro, C., Herrera Mendoza, K., Haeseldonckx, D., Vandecasteele, C., 2018. On the evolution of “Cleaner Production ”as a concept and a practice. J. Clean. Prod. 172, 3323 e3333 . Hochwarter, W.A., Ferris, G.R., Gavin, M.B., Perrew /C19e, P.L., Hall, A.T., Frink, D.D., 2007. Political skill as neutralizer of felt accountability djob tension effects on job performance ratings: A longitudinal investigation. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 102 , 226 e239. Hong, I., Park, S., Lee, B., Lee, J., Jeong, D., Park, S., 2014. IoT-Based Smart Garbage System for Ef ﬁcient Food Waste Management. Sci. World J. 2014, 646953 . Kang, K.D., Kang, H., Ilankoon, I.M.S.K., Chong, C.Y., 2020. Electronic waste collection systems using Internet of Things : Household electronic waste manage- ment in Malaysia. J. Clean. Prod. 252, 119801 . Karim Ghani, W.A.W.A., Rusli, I.F., Biak, D.R.A., Idris, A., 2013. An application of the theory of planned behaviour to study the in ﬂuencing factors of participation in source separation of food waste. Waste Manag. 33 , 1276 e1281 . Knickmeyer, D., 2020. Social factors in ﬂuencing household waste separation: A literature review on good practices to improve the recycling performance ofurban areas. J. Clean. Prod. 245, 118605 . Kristoffersen, E., Blomsma, F., Mikalef, P., Li, J., 2020. The smart circular economy: A digital-enabled circular strategies framework for manufacturing companies. J. Bus. Res. 120, 241 e261. Lerner, J.S., Tetlock, P.E., 1999. Accounting for the effects of accountability. Psychol. Bull. 125 , 255 e275. Lin, K.-P., Yu, C.-M., Chen, K.-S., 2019. Production data analysis system using novel process capability indices-based circular economy. Ind. Manag. Data Syst. 119 , 1655 e1668 . Litzky, B.E., Eddleston, K.A., Kidder, D.L., 2006. The Good, the Bad, and the Misguided: How Managers Inadvertently Encourage Deviant Behaviors. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 20 , 91 e103. Matsumoto, S., 2011. Waste separation at home: Are Japanese municipal curbside recycling policies ef ﬁcient? Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 55 , 325 e334. McDowall, W., Geng, Y., Huang, B., Bartekov /C19a, E., Bleischwitz, R., Türkeli, S., Kemp, R., Dom /C19enech, T., 2017. Circular Economy Policies in China and Europe. J. Ind. Ecol. 21 , 651 e661. Medvedev, A., Fedchenkov, P., Zaslavsky, A., Anagnostopoulos, T., Khoruzhnikov, S., 2015. Waste Management as an IoT-Enabled Service in Smart Cities, Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and Systems. Springer, Cham, pp. 104 e115. Merchant, K.A., Otley, D.T., 2006. A Review of the Literature on Control and Accountability. In: Chapman, C.S., Hopwood, A.G., Shields, M.D. , Hand- books of Management Accounting Research. Elsevier, pp. 785 e802. Minghua, Z., Xiumin, F., Rovetta, A., Qichang, H., Vicentini, F., Bingkai, L., Giusti, A., Yi, L., 2009. Municipal solid waste management in Pudong New Area, China. Waste Manag. 29 , 1227 e1233 . Mitchell, T.R., 1993. Leadership, values, and accountability. In: Chemers, M.M., Ayman, R. , Leadership Theory and Research: Perspectives and Directions.Academic Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 109 e136. Munro, R., 1996. Alignment and identity work: the study of accounts and accountability. In: Munro, R., Mouritsen, J. , Accountability: Power, Ethos and the Technologies of Managing. Thompson Business Press, London, pp. 1 e19. Nasir, M.H.A., Genovese, A., Acquaye, A.A., Koh, S.C.L., Yamoah, F., 2017. Comparing linear and circular supply chains: A case study from the construction industry. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 183 , 443 e457. Pagoropoulos, A., Pigosso, D.C., McAloone, T.C., 2017. The emergent role of digital technologies in the Circular Economy: A review. Procedia CIRP 64, 19 e24. Parizeau, K., von Massow, M., Martin, R., 2015. Household-level dynamics of food waste production and related beliefs, attitudes, and behaviours in Guelph, Ontario. Waste Manag. 35, 207 e217. Parmigiani, A., Klassen, R.D., Russo, M.V., 2011. Ef ﬁciency meets accountability: Performance implications of supply chain con ﬁguration, control, and capabil- ities. J. Oper. Manag. 29 , 212 e223. Pedersen, J.T.S., Manhice, H., 2020. The hidden dynamics of household waste sep- aration: An anthropological analysis of user commitment, barriers, and the gapsbetween a waste system and its users. J. Clean. Prod. 242, 116285 . Rajput, S., Singh, S.P., 2019. Connecting circular economy and industry 4.0. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 49, 98 e113. Ranta, V., Aarikka-Stenroos, L., Ritala, P., M €akinen, S.J., 2018. Exploring institutional drivers and barriers of the circular economy: A cross-regional comparison of China, the US, and Europe. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 135, 70 e82. Reicher, S., Levine, M., 1994. Deindividuation, power relations between groups and the expression of social identity: The effects of visibility to the out-group. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 33 , 145 e163.B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 13 Robert, J., Kubler, S., Kolbe, N., Cerioni, A., Gastaud, E., Fr €amling, K., 2017. Open IoT Ecosystem for Enhanced Interoperability in Smart Cities dExample of M/C19etropole De Lyon. Sensors 17 , 2849 . Rousta, K., Bolton, K., Lundin, M., Dahl /C19en, L., 2015. Quantitative assessment of dis- tance to collection point and improved sorting information on source separa- tion of household waste. Waste Manag. 40, 22 e30. Sekito, T., Prayogo, T.B., Dote, Y., Yoshitake, T., Bagus, I., 2013. In ﬂuence of a community-based waste management system on people ’s behavior and waste reduction. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 72, 84 e90. Spence, L.J., Rinaldi, L., 2014. Governmentality in accounting and accountability: A case study of embedding sustainability in a supply chain. Account. Org. Soc. 39 , 433 e452. Stoeva, K., Alriksson, S., 2017. In ﬂuence of recycling programmes on waste sepa- ration behaviour. Waste Manag. 68, 732 e741, 2017 . Stojkoska, B.L.R., Trivodaliev, K.V., 2017. A review of Internet of Things for smart home: Challenges and solutions. J. Clean. Prod. 140 , 1454 e1464 . Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research Techniques. Sage publi- cations, Thousand Oaks, CA . Tetlock, P.E., 1992. The impact of accountability on judgment and choice: Toward a social contingency model. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 25 , 331 e376. Tomasini Rolando, M., 2004. Pan-american health organization ’s humanitarian supply management system: de-politicization of the humanitarian supply chain by creating accountability. J. Public Procure. 4 , 437 e449. Trevino, L.K., 1992. The Social Effects of Punishment in Organizations: A Justice Perspective. Acad. Manag. Rev. 17 , 647 e676. United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2017. Infographic about Municipal Solid Waste  in the United States in 2017. https://www.epa.gov/sites/ production/ ﬁles/2019-11/documents/msw_infographic_with_2017_data_nov._ 2019.pdf . . Vance, A., Lowry, P.B., Eggett, D., 2013. Using Accountability to Reduce Access Policy Violations in Information Systems. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 29 , 263 e290. Vance, A., Lowry, P.B., Eggett, D., 2015. Increasing accountability through user- interface design artifacts: a new approach to addressing the problem of access-policy violations. MIS Q. 39 , 345 e366. Veleva, V., Bodkin, G., Todorova, S., 2017. The need for better measurement and employee engagement to advance a circular economy: Lessons from Biogen ’s “zero waste ”journey. J. Clean. Prod. 154, 517 e529. Verplanken, B., Faes, S., 1999. Good intentions, bad habits, and effects of forming implementation intentions on healthy eating. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 29 , 591e604. Walther, J.B., 1992. Interpersonal Effects in Computer-Mediated Interaction:A Relational Perspective. Commun. Res. 19 , 52 e90. Wang, Y., Zhang, X., Liao, W., Wu, J., Yang, X., Shui, W., Deng, S., Zhang, Y., Lin, L., Xiao, Y., Yu, X., Peng, H., 2018a. Investigating impact of waste reuse on the sustainability of municipal solid waste  incineration industry using emergy approach: A case study from Sichuan province, China. Waste Manag. 77, 252e267. Wang, Z., Dong, X., Yin, J., 2018b. Antecedents of urban residents ’separate collection intentions for household solid waste and their willingness to pay: Evidence from China. J. Clean. Prod. 173, 256 e264. Webb, T.L., Benn, Y., Chang, B.P.I., 2014. Antecedents and consequences of moni- toring domestic electricity consumption. J. Environ. Psychol. 40, 228 e238. Weiner, B., 2010. The Development of an Attribution-Based Theory of Motivation: A History of Ideas. Educ. Psychol. 45 , 28 e36. Wen, Z., Hu, S., De Clercq, D., Beck, M.B., Zhang, H., Zhang, H., Fei, F., Liu, J., 2018. Design, implementation, and evaluation of an Internet of Things  network system for restaurant food waste management. Waste Manag. 73, 26 e38.Williams, K., Harkins, S.G., Latan /C19e, B., 1981. Identi ﬁability as a deterrant to social loaﬁng: Two cheering experiments. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 40 , 303 e311. Winthereik, B.R., van der Ploeg, I., Berg, M., 2007. The Electronic Patient Record as a Meaningful Audit Tool:Accountability and Autonomy in General Practitioner Work. Sci. Technol. Hum. Val. 32 , 6 e25. Xiao, L., Zhang, G., Zhu, Y., Lin, T., 2017. Promoting public participation in household waste management: A survey based method and case study in Xiamen city, China. J. Clean. Prod. 144, 313 e322. Xinhaunet, 2019. The Regulations on the Management of Domestic Waste in Shanghai Was Of ﬁcially Implemented. The Classi ﬁcation of Waste in Shanghai Has Entered the Era of “Hard Constraints ”. http://www.xinhuanet. com/local/2019-07/01/c_1124696166.htm . . Xu, L., Lin, T., Xu, Y., Xiao, L., Ye, Z., Cui, S., 2016. Path analysis of factors in ﬂuencing household solid waste generation: a case study of Xiamen Island, China. J. Mater. Cycles Waste Manag. 18 , 377 e384. Xu, L., Ling, M., Lu, Y., Shen, M., 2017. Understanding Household Waste Separation Behaviour: Testing the Roles of Moral, Past Experience, and Perceived Policy Effectiveness within the Theory of Planned Behaviour. Sustainability 9 , 625 . Xu, R., 2017. Technologies Enable Rubbish Source Separation in a Residential Community for Beautiful Homes and Environment. http://www.0574fphs.com/ huishouzixun/534.html . Xu, W., Zhou, C., Lan, Y., Jin, J., Cao, A., 2015. An incentive-based source separation model for sustainable municipal solid waste management in China. WasteManag. Res. 33 , 469 e476. Yilmaz, K., 2013. Comparison of Quantitative and Qualitative Research Traditions: epistemological, theoretical, and methodological differences. Eur. J. Educ. 48 , 311 e325. Yin, R.K., 2011. Applications of Case Study Research. Sage Publications . Yuan, Y., Nomura, H., Takahashi, Y., Yabe, M., 2016. Model of Chinese Household Kitchen Waste Separation Behavior: A Case Study in Beijing City. Sustainability8 , 1083 . Zainal, Z., 2007. Case study as a research method. Jurnal Kemanusiaan 5 , 1 e6. Zakaria, Z., 2011. Stakeholder Engagement in Waste Management: Understanding the Process and its Impact on Accountability. University of Nottingham . Zeng, C., Niu, D., Li, H., Zhou, T., Zhao, Y., 2016. Public perceptions and economic values of source-separated collection of rural solid waste: A pilot study in China. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 107, 166 e173. Zhang, A., Venkatesh, V.G., Liu, Y., Wan, M., Qu, T., Huisingh, D., 2019. Barriers to smart waste management for a circular economy in China. J. Clean. Prod. 240, 118198 . Zhang, A., Zhong, R.Y., Farooque, M., Kang, K., Venkatesh, V.G., 2020. Blockchain- based life cycle assessment: An implementation framework and system archi-tecture. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 152, 104512 . Zhang, H., Liu, J., Wen, Z.-g., Chen, Y.-X., 2017. College students ’municipal solid waste source separation behavior and its in ﬂuential factors: A case study in Beijing, China. J. Clean. Prod. 164, 444 e454. Zhang, H., Wen, Z.-G., 2014a. The consumption and recycling collection system of PET bottles: A case study of Beijing, China. Waste Manag. 34 , 987 e998. Zhang, H., Wen, Z.-G., 2014b. Residents ’Household Solid Waste  Source Separation Activity: A Case Study of Suzhou, China. Sustainability 6 , 6446e6466 . Zhang, K., Wen, Z., Peng, L., 2008. Review on environmental policies in China: Evolvement, features, and evaluation. Front. Environ. Sci. Eng. China 2 , 129e141. Zhuang, Y., Wu, S.-W., Wang, Y.-L., Wu, W.-X., Chen, Y.-X., 2008. Source separation of household waste: A case study in China. Waste Manag. 28 , 2022 e2030 .B. Wang, M. Farooque, R.Y. Zhong et al. Journal of Cleaner Production 300  126773 14 

