RESEARCH ARTICLE Co-production in solid waste management: analyses of emerging cases and implications for circular economy in Nigeria Obiora B. Ezeudu1&Tochukwu C. Oraelosi2&Jonah C. Agunwamba1,3&Uzochukwu C. Ugochukwu1 Received: 28 November 2020 /Accepted: 14 May 2021 #The Author, under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021 Abstract Co-production is a paradigm shift from the traditional model of public policymaking and service delivery that advocates for the involvement and participation of end-users of services as co-partaker in the process. In this paper, we examined the emerging models of co-production in solid waste management in Nigeria using a case study methodology. Four cases were purposefullyselected for detailed exploration. The results of the analysis show that the involvement of the plurality of the non-state actors in waste management co-production brought in innovation through ICT, financial resources through grants, and increased public awareness. And have also given the service receivers a change of orientation that makes them perceive waste as a source ofincome rather than all rubbish needed to be discarded. However, possible exploitation of informal waste pickers, unclear business models, and absence of prior arrangement for coming together of both state and non-state actors in designing the service production are challenges to the emerging co-production cas es. The current study further shows that the emerging co- production efforts have huge potential in promoting circular economy as it creates a better avenue for the implementation of extended producer responsibility , the establishment of eco-industrial parks, and safe integration of informal waste recyclers. Keywords Waste disposal .Waste recycling .Informal waste picking .Resource recovery .Waste Policy .Waste reuse Introduction Municipal solid waste is a pervasive urban development chal- lenge of the twenty-first century plaguing both developed anddeveloping societies. Poorly managed solid waste constitutes a source of potential threat to environmental sustainability and public health . As such, its management has become a major issue of deliberation among policymakers, researchers, governments, businesses, and even international organizations. One major factor thatproblematizes solid waste is the issue of material and resource requirements that characterize its management which entails incurring both capital and recurrent expenditure. Capital ex- penditure is required in terms of procuring waste managementfacilities such as compactor vehicles, recycling equipment, and landfill construction. Recurrent expenditures are in the form of costs for fuelling vehicular equipment, payment ofstaff salary, and so on. Because of these associated material and financial burdens, providing efficient waste management delivery cannot often be adequately carried out by state actors,especially in low- and middle-income countries where eco- nomic resources and other critical capacities are limited . There is a growing understanding that the problems asso- ciated with the sustainability of cities and societies such as urban solid waste management cannot be tackled by a unilat-eral approach alone. Hence, opinion has been conveyed that such problems require the successful integration of stake- holders ’efforts towards synergizing resources, knowledge, ideas, and technical expertise . This posi- tion is in rhythm with the sustainable development concept that strongly emphasizes multiple levels of cooperation and Responsible Editor: Ta Yeong Wu *Obiora B. Ezeudu obiezeudu@yahoo.com 1Centre for Environmental Management and Control, University OfNigeria, Enugu Campus, Enugu 410001, Nigeria 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nnamdi AzikiweUniversity, Awka, Nigeria 3Department of Civil Engineering, University of Nigeria, Nsukka 410001, NigeriaEnvironmental Science and Pollution Research https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-14471-8 collaboration towards solving global problems together (Ngan et al. 2019 ). Co-production, therefore, is a paradigm shift from the traditional model of public policymaking and service de-livery that advocates for the involvement and participation of end-users of services as co-partaker in the process. This new public governance model recognizes variants of collaborativearrangements as viable governance options at different levels . In high-income societies, the inclusion within the governing processes of the plurality ofactors has gained wider acceptability and is increasingly being regarded as a proactive way of addressing complex societal problems . But it is also recognized that in the low- and middle-income countries, where resources are usually limited due to incomplete devel- opment, that co-production is practically inevitable in publicservice delivery . In recent times, few research works have been carried out on the adoption and implementation of co-productionas a public policy delivery method at the developing lo- cations of the globe (Lu and Sidortsov 2019 ;M a n g a ia n d De Vries 2018 ; Mukherjee and Mukherjee 2017 ; Gutberlet 2015 ). But most of these works are largely conducted outside Africa explicating the other global south experience especially in waste management . The heteroge- neous characterizing features of cities and societies alongglobal regional lines in terms of social, political, econom- ic, demographic, and even cultural peculiarities make it unavoidably necessary to study other regional and coun-tries’experiences towards contributing to the global dis- course of co-production in waste management. Nigeria being the most populous nation and the highest producerof urban solid waste in Africa is more appropriately sit- uated to be studied as a case study. The current work will, therefore, provide a departure point for understand-ing co-production in solid waste management in Africa ’s context. Moreover, the previous works on co-production in waste management had dwelled more on fewer com-ponents of waste management systems. For instance, waste sorting (Lu and Sidortsov 2019 ;D iL i d d oa n d Vinella 2020 ); waste reduction and sorting (Mclaren and Agyeman 2015 ); waste collection (Landi and Russo 2020 ); and informal recycling (Failor 2010 ;G u t b e r l e t 2015 ). The current work discussed more components such as waste conversion, waste transportation, e-waste management, recycling, informal recycling, and resource recovery. The paper is structured as follows: the introduction de- scribes the background of the research study; the next section is a brief literature overview and conceptual framework;Section “Methodology ”explains the study methodology; the results and findings are discussed in the section “Research findings and discussion. ”The final section is the conclusion.Literature/conceptual framework Waste management status in Nigeria: brief overview With a population currently estimated at 198 million people in 2019, Nigeria is struggling with enormous socio-economicchallenges which have been predicted to persist into the future due to  unmitigated growth in both general and urban pop- ulation and  lack of attendant growth in the country ’sc r i t - ical capacities such as state-of-the-art urban infrastructure, ad- vancement in technology and economic resources (Ezeudu 2020 ;E z e u d ue ta l . 2020 ). Thus, the continuous population growth results in the proliferation of both urban and urbaniz- ing areas and the resultant rise in the quantities of solid waste generated by communities . The quantity of waste generated by 106 million people currently living in Nigeria ’s cities is about 67,000 tonnes per day , and this value is projected to exceed 125,000 TPD by 2040 . Unfortunately, both in the past and the present, Nigeria ’s waste management procedures, policies, and insti- tutional arrangement has followed a top-down structural ap-proach where qualitative laws are made with little or no con- siderations to the input of the non-state actors in the policymaking and service delivery cycle of commissioning, design, delivery, or assessment (Agunwamba 1998 ;E z e u d u et al. 2020 ). This has led to undesired waste management outcomes in the form of poor waste collection services, inef- ficient recycling, and resource recovery schemes, and abysmal waste disposal methods which have characterized manyNigerian cities . The current status of waste management in Nigeria is also characterized by the absence of waste management data, absence of wastesorting schemes, lack of conceptual planning for waste mini- mization, inadequate financing mechanism, and poor waste management policy regimes . Detailed discussion on the past and current waste management prac- tices in Nigeria can be found in Ezeudu et al. . Meanwhile, today ’s conceptualization of sustainable waste management operations has gone beyond adequate waste col- lection and efficient disposal, to include business and econom- ic possibilities towards achieving a circular economy . The heightening awareness that the global resources are finite in availability has triggered a grow- ing focus by businesses exploring better resources and processefficiency at different stages of production and consumption to promote the principles of circular economy (Patwa et al. 2021 ). Circular economy principles promote waste reduction, waste reuse, eliminating waste and pollution, optimal use of products, and regeneration of natural resources . Previous works on the circular economy in solid waste management in Nigeria has identified the key enablers to circular economy adoption as the presence of informal waste recycling activities, the existenceEnviron Sci Pollut Res of government agencies that serve as formal regulators, prov- en marketability of the solid waste streams generated across the country , and collaboration among stakeholders . In recent times, many co-production efforts have continued to emerge in Nigeria to tackle the country ’s monumental waste management challenges. The aim of this paper is, there- fore, to analyze these co-production efforts to synthesize their prospective challenges and opportunity and also to recom-mend scientific solutions and guidance that will reposition them towards effective public service delivery in Nigeria. The current work will further discuss the implications of thisco-production in waste management for a circular economy. The concept of co-production Before the 1970s, the dominant interaction method betweenthe public administration and public service receivers waspassive, where governments provide services to the public with the limited active participation of the citizens . The introduction of co-production as an alternative method of public service delivery is princi- pally hinged on the belief that the production and delivery of services, unlike the production of goods, is often difficultwithout the active participation of the recipients (Ostrom 1996 ). Hence, the citizen ’s contributions have proved neces- sary for the production and delivery of hard services —such as police, military service, and waste management —and soft ser- vices such as education, health, and disaster management . The advantage of this change in service production method is that it has turned the receivers of public services into consumers that can exercise choices, while at the same time reframes the co-production as something that canbe added to the repertoires of services delivery arrangements to improve efficiency . The concept of co-production as a public policy mecha- nism has evolved from traditional methods that constitute mainly of organization and competition in public service de- livery to non-traditional methods characterized by differentcollaborative arrangements and multiple actors ’involvements . The taxonomy of co-production in public service has also been highlighted in the extant body ofliterature (Bovaird et al. 2015 ; Mukherjee and Mukherjee 2017 ). The commonly agreed facts among scholars are that the actors in co-production can be broadly categorized into two which include  the state actors or agents acting on behalf of the government either through direct or indirect con-tracts and  non-state actors that interact with the state actors in public service delivery. Another classification in co- production also exists along with the roles and objectives ofthe actors which include individual co-production andcollec- tive co-production . Individual co-production is defined as a production arrangement where a client or a customer,individually or in a group participates in the production or part-production of the services they use while receiving ben- efits that are largely personal . In the collective variant, co-production includes efforts from cit- izens, volunteers, and other non -governmental partners, intending to provide benefit to the entire community.Nabatchi et al.  classified co-production according to four service cycles in which it can occur. The first is co- commission which entails working together of state actors and non-state actors in strategizing, prioritizing, and identify- ing the needed public services, outcomes, and users. Co- design involves undertaking public service delivery planning decisions together . Co-delivery means joint actions undertaken by the two parties at the point of delivering the services while the last stage which is co- assessment means post evaluation and monitoring of public services by the two actors. Recent scholarships have also pos- ited that  the extension of the co-production process to ac-commodate behavioral changes among the citizens in the de- sign and implementation of public service delivery is equally essential in assessing the outcome of the service production;  positive attitude on the part of public officers could improve the co-production out- comes . One of the key enablers to co- production in public service delivery in modern times is ad- vances in information and communication technology  . Through the creation of an interactive platform, ICT builds a platform for extensive input from users, knowledge integration, and user participation which are essen-tial elements required for effective co-production in public service delivery . Although the impacts of digital technologies on different elements of co-productioncould be evaluated through an analytical framework (Lember et al. 2019 ). Table 1summarizes the conceptual framework. Methodology This study is conducted adopting a qualitative method for the following reasons:  survey-based methodologies and quan- titative measurements are either less-preferred or inappropri- ate for examining organizational processes such as co-production arrangement (Strauss and Corbin 2007 ;Y i n 1994 );  when the specific objective of the research is to gain an understanding of richness and complexity of the phe- nomenon, quantitative methods such as survey-based and quantitative approach are less capable of providing detailand capturing insights, making the qualitative method more appropriate ;  qualitative research methods provides a unique avenue for understanding com-plex, nuanced situations where interpersonal ambiguity and multiple interpretations exist . We, therefore, use an exploratory case study t oa s s e s sEnviron Sci Pollut Res the problems and challenges of co-production arrangements in waste management in Nigeria. Four cases were selected forthe exploration through purposeful sampling methodology which is a criterion-based selection method that allows sam- pling only by predefined profile and “information-rich cases ” . This is to ensure that a great deal about matters of importance can be synthesized for in-depth study (Patton 2001 ). The criteria for the selection of the first three cases is that the case will be substantially involved in the components of a waste management system which include, waste minimi- zation, waste sorting, waste transportation, waste recycling,resource recovery, waste collection, and/or waste disposal. The initial data collection and analysis show that these first three cases had similar motivations for involving in co-pro-duction. The fourth case was added to explicate the roles of ICT in co-production (as mentioned earlier in the conceptual framework) to enrich the study. The research data was collect-ed through public available archival sources such as company websites, news documentaries, project documents of interna- tional aid agencies archived, YouTube interviews/documen-taries, magazines, and newspapers. The data obtained from different sources were triangulated and it shows a high degree of consistency (Denzin and Lincoln 2005 ; Miles and Huberman 1984 ). The data was analyzed using the iterative process of case comparison. The cases are described in section “Case description. ” In addition to this, we conducted a focus group discussion  to complement the case data. Multiple data collection in qualitative research aids in obtaining maximum insight intospecialized topics . FGD as a re- search method is unique as it employs an interactional but guided discussion as a means of generating ‘the rich details of complex experience and the reasoning behind actions, per- ceptions, beliefs, and attitude ’. Also, FGD is appropriate where the existing knowledge of a study is limitedand elaboration of pertinent issues is necessary (Powell and Single 1996 ). Adopting the purposive sampling method as recommended by Patton , ten professionals were select- ed from the waste management industry. Purposive selection adds potency to the focus group discussion since the best-desired data can be generated through ‘rich information cases ’ . Participants were recruited and selected specif- ically ‘because they can illuminate the topic being studied ’ . The ten selected participants in- clude four active researchers in the area of waste management,two waste management professionals from the private sector, two waste managers working with the government and the remaining two participants serve as observers. The two ob-servers will observe to ensure impartiality in the process . A letter of invi- tation and information leaflets were sent to the participantahead of the discussion. The FGD lasted for sixty minutes and was video/audio recorded transcribed and analyzed. The themes of the focus group discussion were developed to com-plement the case research data. The following themes were highlighted during the discussion. The prospects and opportunities of the emerging co- production models in waste management in Nigeria  The challenges and limitations of the emerging models of co-production in waste management in Nigeria  The future directions of the emerging models of co- production in waste management in Nigeria  The implications for the Circular economy Case description Case 1: Wecyclers —a waste recycling initiative Lagos is the African most populated city and therefore the largest city producing urban solid waste in the continent. The population of Lagos was estimated at 20 million people in 2016 concentrated in a localized land area of 3577 km2 which makes the city among the most densely populated in Africa. The public institutions responsible for the waste man- agement in the city cannot properly manage its waste due tofactors such as poor street network, traffic congestion, inade- quate staff, poor technology, and limited economic resources. This has resulted in tremendous waste managementTable 1 The summarized conceptual framework for co-production Attributes of Co-productions Description Actors Actors are broadly categorized as state actors and non-state actors Grouping based on roles/objectives Individual co-production and collective co-productionGrouping based on public administration and service delivery methodsTraditional and non-traditional methods. Traditional methods mean organization and competition in public service delivery, while non-traditional methods involve different corroborative arrangements and multiple actors. Classification according to service cycle Co-commissioning, co-design, co-delivery, and co-assessment, behavioral change assessment.The key enabler to co-production in service deliveryInformation and Communication Technology Environ Sci Pollut Res challenges that impose an imminent potential threat to the urban environment and public health. Heaps of waste dumped beneath the bridges, water channels, and railway tracks are acommon sight in the city. The collection services are limited to the visibility areas while low-income areas such as slums and ghettos are left out . The only known existing private participation in waste management in Lagos is through the traditional public-private partnerships where some private entities join in the service delivery through contractterms . Going by the full and rounded mean- ing of co-production, this practice meets the criteria as co- production in the traditional sense but has limitations in to-day’s narrowed conception of co-production that distinctively separate state actors  from non-state actors. Motivated by the problem caused by thecity’s poorly handled waste, MIT graduate, Bilkiss Adebiyi co-founded “Wecylers, ”a waste recycling outfit in 2012. Wecyclers first started as a local innovation that collects solidwaste from Lagos ’s poor urban households. The initial aim was to bring waste management services to the underserved population and households in the municipal city. Due to poorstreet networks, the state waste management authorities are not able to access these areas with standard waste collection trucks and other vehicular equipment. Wecyclers designed a tricycle for easy navigation of the streets where the waste will be collected . They will take the waste to the designated center for sorting and informs the households through mobile phone messages on how many points they have earned for trading theirdiscarded items. The points are converted and rewarded to the households in the form of food items, cleaning products, and cell phone call units. At present, the Wecyclers wastemanagement initiative is operating a model that integrates low-cost recyclables waste management facilities which uses technology to raise awareness on the importance of recycling.As of January 2020, Wecyclers has collected over 6200 tonsof waste, serviced over 20,000 households, and employed over 80 people . Further partnerships have been created with small andmedium-scale industries and multinational companies that place a demand for recyclables. Recognizing the impact of this service on the city dweller, the Lagos State WasteManagement Authorities has also formed a partnership with the company in the policy framework that will ensure the sustainability of the operation. At the onset of the initiatives,the company visits households to register them as customers/ partners, but over time more and more people are visiting the company to register on their own as they want to be part of thereward system . Another incentive to this is that the waste management regulation of the state requires the households to pay for their waste collection services, while theWecyclers offer a reverse model where households get paid for their trash. Wecyclers are also issuing franchises for other entrepreneurs at the various Nigerian locations for recreationof the same waste recycling model. Case 2: Hinckley Recycling —e-waste recycling outfit There is clear evidence that formal recycling of urban solid waste is non-existent in Nigeria and the previous attempts bythe government to establish recycling schemes on solid waste have not been successful ( Nzeadibe and Ajaero 2011 ;E z e u d u et al. 2020 ). A large volume of e-waste generated in Nigeria annually together with the ones that come from abroad con- stitute a serious threat to the public health and environmental sustainability in the country . The informal e- waste recycling system in Nigeria which consists of waste pickers, scrap dealers, and middlemen has been in existence but operates with rudimentary methods. This exposes thewaste workers to potential harm and toxic substances. Hinckley Group started operations in Nigeria in 1998 as a telecommunications consultancy firm servicing the oil and Fig. 1 Tricycle designed/ constructed by Wecyclers for convenient waste collection services from inaccessible areasEnviron Sci Pollut Res gas industry. When the company began acquiring high vol- umes of non-functional and end-of-life IT equipment, they began to explore e-waste management opportunities. The af-termath is Hinckley Recycling, an e-waste recycling outfit that they established in 2018. Because of the heightening aware- ness that e-waste embodied some varied amount of hazardoussubstances , its handling requires special skill and specialized training to avoid expo- sure to harms and health hazards. With collaboration with theAssociation of Vendors for Used Electronic and Allied Products, the company recruits and trains scavengers on safe methods of e-waste dismantling and handling . Through their program “closing the loop, ”they partner with local entrepreneurs (e.g., students running a small busi- ness, established companies) and waste pickers to collect andstore scrap e-waste material for onward shipment to the devel- oped countries following Basel Convention guidelines and the Nigerian local regulations such as Lagos State EnvironmentalProtection Agency  and National Environmental Standards and Regulations Enforcement Agency . Under the “Collect and Recycle Services, ” Hinckley Recycling offers specialized services that target or- ganizations that have obsolete or unwanted technology equip- ment for recovering redundant electronic items, securely de- stroy all confidential and protected data, and manages the safe recycling of e-waste. As of June 2020, it is reported that theclosing the loop program has helped over 2000 people to earn additional income through safe employment, and over 2.2 million phones have been collected  Case 3:Pearl Recycling —waste recovery and conversion initiative Nigeria ’s current urban population of 106 million people gen- erates about 67,000 tonnes of waste per day (Ezeudu et al. 2020 ). The state cannot optimally collect this waste for proper disposal. Consequently, a large proportion of them ends up in unauthorized places such as drainages, roadsides, and canals. Motivated by the need to fill this public service delivery gap,Olamide Ayeni-Babjide founded Pearl Recycling. Pearl Recycling is a social enterprise initiative that collects munic- ipal solid waste components  for reuse and in re- making of innovative products such as furniture and decora- tive wares. The company employs uneducated artisans as waste collectors , while the collected waste is treated before being transformed into sustainable furniture anddecorative arts . Through the “pay for cash initiative, ”Pearl Recycling en- courages urban dwellers to bring their discarded products totheir workshop for exchange for cash or swap with finished products at a discounted rate. The implication is that the outfit is instigating a mindset change among the urban dwellerswhereby households individually sort their waste before dis- posal to remove items that can be traded for a value. Pearl Recycling ’s workshop has turned into a vocational skill transfer/acquisition center that attracts a large number of un- employed youths that come to learn how to convert waste material into an innovative product. For instance, in partner-ship with the Ford Foundation through grant funding, the company has trained 100 unemployed youths in Lagos on waste conversion techniques, thereby increasing the aware-ness and the population of Nigerians with knowledge of waste conversion . The company has also partnered with artisans  and informal wastepickers to ensure constant and optimal collection of special- ized waste such as tyre and discarded CD plates waste. By 2020, the recycling scheme has trained and empowered over9800 people  and sensitized around 3 million Nigerians on waste recycling through social media channels, and have collected and upcycled over 2000 tons ofwaste . Another unique thing is that their finished products made from waste are targeted at also providing affordable consumables to the poor and vulnerablewho cannot afford comparable products. The inexpensive na- ture of the products is probably because the products are made from waste materials. Currently, Pearl Recycling is creating upcycling hubs across Lagos while making plans for expan- sion within and beyond Nigeria. Case 4:OkwuEco —mobile App for waste collectors/dealers OkwuEco is an IT app created by a Nigerian startup that uses image recognition to educate households about recycling and links them with merchants who can trade their waste material for cash credits or mobile data through the security of anonline platform . The app creates a kind of market arena for the interaction of buyers and sellers of waste items. Through the OkwuEco app, users identify, sort,buy, and dispose of solid waste from any location in the coun- try. The transaction could be for cash or product swap. The OkwuEco app further creates a platform for automatic sched-ules for pickups or drop-offs with waste merchants or disposal services. OkwuEco was incorporated in November 2019 and is currently piloting with 70 users, selected among waste mer- chants and dealers. The app is user-friendly and supports mul- tiple languages and payment options and is specifically de- signed to capture the needs of even unbanked segments in the Nigerian urban areas. It has impact tools that offer action- able insights for effective user engagements and decision-making. Just like what is often common to new IT solutions, the mobile app is currently attracting the attention of several stakeholders whose inputs have been useful in fine-tuning thenew technology and redesigning the business model. This is to embrace market dynamics and policy landscapes towards ef- ficient quality service delivery. OkwuEco generates revenueEnviron Sci Pollut Res by charging a percentage on transactions made through the IT platform while merchants also pay a subscription fee.Furthermore, the new technology helps the users to mark ille- gal dumpsites in their living locations, of which they can no- tify the state authorities about or organize cleanups and earnpoints. In the long term, the app will help waste merchants and dealers to lower overhead costs on logistics, expand and con- nect to new market segments, measure the impact of revenue,and could track and report data on recyclables in Nigeria . The summary of the attributes of the cases is presented in Table 2. Research findings and discussion Prospects and opportunities Waste management is a critical and essential public service globally. In most places around the world, the provision of effective and sustainable waste services is the statutory obli-gation of governments through policies, material deployment, financing mechanisms, and institutional arrangements. Waste management typically involves activities such as waste col-lection, waste transportation, waste storage, waste recycling, resource recovery, and waste disposal methods. But the poor status of these services at the many Nigerian city locations is evidence to prove the inability of the state actors in delivering and providing these essential services. In the four cases de-scribed, the non-state actors were motivated by the need to complement the effort of the state which is a critical element of the non-traditional type of co-production in public servicedelivery. This position was succinctly captured by Governance International that regards co-production as “pro- fessionals and citizens making better use of each other ’sassets, resources and contributions to achieve better outcomes or improved efficiency ”. The plurality of actors involved in the four cases that range from entrepreneurs, IT engineers, artisans, to tricycle drivers, and bring multi-dimensional expertise, ideas, and resourcestowards solving a complex social problem of solid waste man- agement. Consequently, certain elements that were absent in the waste management system in Nigeria such as safe e-wasterecycling outfits , conversion of waste to decorative items  and monitoring of waste collection through IT devices  have also been introduced as an innovationtowards improving waste service delivery. Currently, there is no documented data on waste manage- ment in Nigeria for the use of the waste management author- ities in the country either at the state, local, or national levels . The prospect here is that with the introduction of the ICT in the waste sectors through IT app, monitoring, evaluation, and collation of waste management data could be made possible. The FGD unani-mously agreed that the co-opting of multiple actors with var- ied professional skills and backgrounds in public service de- livery such as waste management is the right thing to do es-pecially in a multi-sectional economy like Nigeria. Poor awareness and knowledge among the public have often been reported as a major setback to effective waste man-agement in most developing countries (Hoornweg and Bhada- Tata 2012 ). The four described cases have evidence to show their capabilities in heightening public awareness of wasterecycling from waste products. For instance, Pearl Recycling through its programs and operations has made the majority of urban dwellers know that most of their household items per-ceived to have reached the end of their service cycle could be sold or converted to a new product; Wecyclers waste manage- ment initiatives are increasing awareness among the Fig. 2 A decorative household furniture made from the wastetyre at Pearl Recycling (source: Design Indaba.com 2017)Environ Sci Pollut Res households that they can get value for their waste items in the form of food materials, cleaning products, and mobile phone airtime. The use of daily household goods, such as milk andshampoo, as an incentive to draw citizens into waste manage- ment co-production has also been reported in Shangai, China . Participant #4 during the FGD noted that the emerging co-production in the country could raise the con- sciousness among the urban dwellers that the waste initially meant to be discarded can be traded for value. This invariablywould diminish indiscriminate waste disposal habits and in- crease waste recycling rates. In developing countries, municipalities often dedicate about 80 –90% of their annual waste management budget to waste collection at the urban centers (Hoornweg and Bhada- Tata 2012 ; Scarlet et al. 2015 ). Notwithstanding, the services a r en o ts t i l le f f i c i e n ta n do f t e nl i m i t e dt oo n l yh i g h -a n d middle-income areas, while urban low-income areas such as slums, ghettos, and shanties are often neglected . This is usually because of poor street networks that make it difficult to access by waste col- lection trucks. Wecycler ’s case concentrated on these urban poor areas to deliver effective waste management. What this means in a broad sense is that additional resources and mate- rials have been deployed from non-state players to supplementthe effort of the state government towards delivering an essen- tial public service. Also, the Wecycler case described has shown the ability to attract funds/grants from non-state playersto waste management delivery in Nigeria. Wecyclers, for ex- ample, attracted grants from foreign universities, while the Pearl Recycling training program for the 100 youths wassponsored by Ford Foundation. The FGD participant #5 ex- plained that for the emerging co-production outfits being able to access funds/grants and supports from donor agenciesshows that they met a certain level of organizational standard and operation protocols such as transparency and integrity.The Focus group unanimously commented on the need for emerging waste management co-production models to be fur- ther strengthened to attracting more resources for waste ser-vice delivery. Challenges and barriers Despite the progress and prospects brought by the co-production efforts in waste management in Nigeria asdiscussed in the foregoing section, several imminent chal- lenges and limitations still abound. Firstly, the waste manage- ment policies and institutional arrangements in Nigeria havefollowed top-down structural settings where the government makes a qualitative law without the input of non-state actors and the so-called laws are often devoid of scientific, econom-ic, and business realities on the ground (Ezeudu and Ezeudu 2019 ). In the state-of-the-art public service delivery, it is now increasingly recognized that the complex “wicked ”policy problem such as waste management requires the successful integration of scientific knowledge with local knowledge of particular social, environmental, and historical circumstances. This is called the co-production of knowledge for policymaking . In Nigeria, the first and second stages in the service cycle of co-production (as pointed out in the conceptual framework at the foregoing section), which are co-commissioning and co-design have been non- existent. In all the cases (except Wecycler that has attracted a partnership with the Lagos state towards a sustainable policy),there was no onset arrangement for the coming together of both state and non-state actors towards identifying, prioritiz- ing, and/or planning the waste management service produc-tion. Because waste management involves a complex chain of activities —such as waste minimization, collection, transpor- tation, recycling, and resource recovery and disposalTable 2 Characteristics of the cases  Case characteristicsWecyclers Pearl Recycling Hinckley Recycling OkwuEco Nature of organizationHybrid  Hybrid  Business Business Component of waste manage-mentsystem handledWaste collection, sorting, transportation, recycling, and resource recovery.Waste collection, waste transportation, upcycling, resource recovery, wastemanagement educationE-waste recycling, recovery, e-waste education. Waste transportation, wasteexportationWaste education, waste collection, waste recycling, masssensitization, wastedata tracking. Actors involvedEntrepreneurs, informal waste pickers, households,multinationals, international agencies, Lagos state government, tricycle drivers,etcUneducated/informal waste pickers, unemployed women and youths,artisans, NGOs, international aid agencies, furniture dealers, entrepreneurs, artisans,vulcanizers, etcInformal waste pickers, entrepreneurs, business owners,formal companies, multinationals, shipping companies, governmentregulators, etcWaste dealer, waste merchants, wastesellers, households, telecommunication companies, IT firms, Location Lagos Lagos Lagos JosEnviron Sci Pollut Res methods —synergistic knowledge at the commissioning and design stages of policy and service delivery is a critical neces- sity. Waste landfilling, for instance, is an essential componentof the waste management system since all other methods of waste handling will eventually yield residues that must be disposed of through landfilling . All the four cases described are involved in recycling, collection, transportation, sorting, and resource recovery op- erations, and therefore will still generate a waste stream thatwould be disposed of through landfill. Landfilling being the final waste disposal method is still abysmally and solely han- dled by the state actors/agents in Nigeria. Participants # 1, 2,and 7 in the FGD contributed that “In essence without a co- production in all the components of waste management sys- tems, the general progress achieved through the emerging co-production efforts would still be largely undermined. ” Secondly, the free-for-all proliferation of the waste co- production models could lead to abuse and exploitation ofmaterial and resources if not properly harmonized and regu- lated. Three of the four cases (Wecyclers, Pearl Recycling, and Hinckley Recycling) largely involve the engagementand recruitment of informal waste pickers. Informal waste pickers consist of the urban poor which are mainly women and children and as such are often prone to exploitation and abuse . At the informal waste recycling system in Nigeria, the exploitation of poor waste pickers bythe middlemen has been reported in the past (Nzeadibe and Ajaero 2011 ). Middlemen in the waste picking value chain are businessmen that buy the picked recyclables from the wastepickers . Since they often have the fund to mop-up the recyclable in a quantity that the factories can buy, they become more influential in the informal waste pickingmarket and most of often than not control the prices and fix transaction conditions that are unfavorable to the poor waste pickers . Fear of exploitation of informal waste pickers is an imminent challenge in the emerging co- productions models. For instance, it was mentioned in the case of Pearl Recycling that most of the recruited waste pickers areuneducated which has automatically limited their ability to engage in fair bargains and negotiations. In the Wecyclers case, it was also mentioned that the company rewards house-holds with foodstuff, cleaning products, and mobile phone airtime which probably could undermine fairness in the re- ward system. The group interaction indicated an agreementthat, though informal waste pickers have become an essential element in the emerging waste management co-production, there is a need for a proper guideline to be laid by the author-ities to ensure their healthy and safe inclusion in the co- productions efforts. Third, in all four cases, there is non-uniformity in the busi- ness model. It is not easy to understand the exact business model applied by the emerging co-production outfits. Wecycler, Pearl Recyclers, and Hinckley Recycling seem topractice a hybrid model that includes both not-for-profit and for-profit business models. Participants #1, 2, and 8 argued that if these business models are not harmonized through ap-propriate formal regulations and policies, it could likely lead to two outcomes:  not being able to attract funding, incen- tives, and grants from appropriate quarters;  fraudulentpractices like an invasion of taxes. The standard practice is that if an organization declares for non-profit, it could attract funding from charitable organizations and perhaps a rebatefrom the government to support its public service production. Whereas if it declares for-profit, it then becomes appropriately positioned to pay taxes and levies, while its co-productioneffort in public service delivery could be measured and cate- gorized under corporate social responsibility. Fourth, despite the huge potential in urban solid waste val- orization as exemplified in the discussed cases, there is still a need for wider consciousness that certain classes of waste such as e-waste  and tyre waste  still embodied some hazardous substances, there- by requires a special guideline for handling. Although the case report shows that Hinckley Recycling applies internationalbest practices in its e-waste handling operations, and the con- version of the tyre to furniture as done by Pearl Recycling was also after proper treatment; there is still a need for document- ed, unified, and generalized guideline to be regulated by the state actors through policies and institutions. This is crucial forother prospective entrepreneurs that would want to recreate the models in the country. Future directions and implications for circular economy Contemporary deliberations on urban solid waste manage- ment are largely overlapping with the concept of the circular economy. The circular economy involves the application of practices, policies, and institutions towards ensuring a regen-erative and restorative approach to waste and resource man- agement. It leads to an increase in waste recycling rates, job creation, business profitability while ensuring the current andfuture sustainability of the environment and safeguards of public health. The implications for the circular economy as it concerns the emerging co-production models in waste man-agement in Nigeria will be discussed in what follows: Eco-industrial park The eco-industrial park is an essential element of a circular economy system where industries, factories, and businesses are located in proximity to each other for mutual benefit and for the goal of waste reduction and pollution control andachieving environmental quality promotions at large . Participant # 7 contributed that “the emerging models of co-production in waste management inEnviron Sci Pollut Res Nigeria are already creating an avenue for collaboration among businesses and undertakings that share mutual objec- tives and goals. It, therefore, has created an avenue for theestablishment of eco-industrial parks in a meso-level circular economy system through appropriate policies. ”Although the Henckely Recycling case tends to observe standardizedmethods in its operations, there are still no clear indications that the e-waste recycling facilities are located far from house- hold settlements. Environmental pollution resulting from e-waste recycling activities is tipped as a major contributor to negative health impacts in the communities where this infor- mal recycling takes place with women and children being themost vulnerable . Group discussion submitted that the emerging co-production efforts have created the opportunity for the onset planning for eco-industrial parks especially for e-waste recycling outfits that would be sited far from human inhabitants.  Extended producer responsibility Nigeria ’s waste management policy landscapes and prac- tices have not extensively integrated extended producer re- sponsibility in the circular economy manner (Ezeudu and Ezeudu 2019 ). One key factor that is likely responsible for this could the absence of information and lack of knowledge on how EPR could be implemented. However, the vast ma-jority of items used in Nigeria can be linked to either a foreign or local producer. The Hinckley Recycling case described has shown the practical possibility of shipping e-waste back to thedeveloped countries, while Wecyclers entered into partner- ships with indigenous multin ationals (e.g., Coca-Cola, GlaxoSmithKline) on the return of recyclables. Even in ab-sence of a formal proclamation of circular economy in the country, the studied co-production cases have established ef- fective collaborations in the form of EPR. Participant #6 sug-gested that these existing EPR could serve as an avenue and key enabler to the implementation of EPR in the country in a circular economy manner.  Informal waste pickers/job creation Informal waste pickers often regarded as the informal econ- omy plays a key role in the circular economy by promoting the integrated management of the city ’s solid waste (Siman et al. 2020 ). It is an activity that mainly involves the urban poor that use the most rudimentary method to retrieve a value from waste material for onward recycling. Safe inclusion of theactivities of informal waste pickers requires taking measures that will ensure that their occupational health and safety are guaranteed. The major challenge associated with informalwaste picking is their lack of organization, poor economic status, illiteracy, and vulnerability to harm and illness. The co-production efforts studied have shown that informal wastepickers are crucial to urban waste management delivery in Nigeria. Therefore, the advent of interactions between waste pickers and formal/corporate businesses is a development thatwill foster circular economy introduction in Nigeria. Nevertheless, this will require a policy change that will ensure that their interests and health will be protected.  End-of-life waste treatment practices For a complete articulation and implementation of a circu- lar economy model in waste management, there is a need for effective and environmentally efficient end-of-life waste treat-ment methods . None of the four co- production cases described involves end-of-life waste treat- ment. However, it is already indicated that the co-productionoutfits will eventually produce waste residues that still require treatment and disposal. This is another good opportunity for the integration of modalities for final waste treatment in theco-production models. For instance, the majority of the resi- due that will be generated by Hinckley Recycling  would best be handled by incineration. Although, the highcost of incinerators has been hinted at as the major impedi- ment to its massive deployment in sub-Sahara Africa (Scarlet et al. 2015 ). But through appropriate policy incentives, the waste management recycling outfits could be supported by the government/NGOs  to acquire incineratorfacilities for appropriate waste treatment. Another way to look at it is that the large quantity of residue from co-production outfits  are usually non-recoverable resources (lefto ver after resource recovery/ recycling) and therefore only suitable for final disposal in the landfill. Depositing only sorted waste items in the landfillprolongs its lifespan, minimizes the cost of maintenance, pro- tects the underground water sources, and reduces environmen- tal air pollutions. All these attributes are essential in effectivecircular economy implementation in solid waste management. Further policy implications Successful implementation of circular economy requires thedesign and implementation of appropriate policies and en-forcement of regulations . The existing waste management practices in Nigeria are typically such that state actors collect waste from designated locations and dis- pose of them at the dumpsites and landfills . Asides from the payment of waste management levies, theexisting policies never specify the roles and contributions of the citizenry in urban solid waste management. Consequently, the vast majority of Nigerians only participate in waste man-agement by only self-delivering their wastes to community bins with little or no effort at sorting or separating from the source. This has indirectly affected the country ’sw a s t eEnviron Sci Pollut Res recycling rates and also negatively reflects on the overall waste management status. Restructuring of policies is there- fore a way forward. The Wecyclers and Pearl Recycling ex-perience have shown that with incentives the urban house- holds can be co-opted into waste sorting and recycling. It has therefore given a clue on how incentivize policies canaffect the attitude and interest of the masses on waste manage- ment. We believe that the current waste management policy framework can be finetuned as it was done in Shanghai, Chinawhere the local government in collaboration with the Bank of China introduced a household “Green account ”(Wu et al. 2016 ). Through the initiative, household waste sorting results in points in the account which can be redeemed for items such as milk and shampoo, and/or deductions in utility bills (Lu and Sidortsov 2019 ). Meanwhile, there is an urgent need for regulation of the existing and emerging co-production efforts through policy and institutional frameworks. The targeted areas of this regu-lation should be on ensuring optimal occupational health and safety conditions of the participating informal waste pickers, harmonization of the business models, and involving thewaste management co-producers in the design and commis- sioning stages of service production. It is our opinion that the existing waste management authorities in the various states of the federation should be restructured to undertake these func- tions and empowered by law to enforce them. Conclusions Waste management is a complex and hard public service. A large body of evidence has also shown that due to multiple socio-economic challenges such as poor economic resourcesand inefficient urban infrastructure, cities in low- and middle- income countries cannot adequately tackle their waste man- agement problems relying solely on the resources and effortsof the state actors. Participation and contribution are required from the citizenry. Based on this understanding, the current work examined the different models of co-production in wastemanagement in Nigeria, to synthesize and analyze their pros- pects, challenges, opportunities, and future direction towards possible circular economy adoption. The result of the studyrightly shows that several actors with varied skills and profes- sional backgrounds are already partaking in waste manage- ment delivery in the country. These actors have introduced increased awareness on waste recycling, extra resources through grants, and innovations through ICT and waste con-version thereby complementing the efforts of the government. However, lack of onset arrangement on co-commissioning and co-designing of waste management service production,non-uniformity in the business operating models, and absence of generalized guideline for regulation are challenges to the effective waste management co-production in the country.Also, the studied co-production cases have huge potential in fostering the adoption of circular economy in the country es- pecially in promoting the establishment of eco-industrialparks, extended producer responsibility, and safe integration of informal waste recycling. Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the support received from UNN/SHELL Centre for Environmental Management andControl, University of Nigeria, Enugu Campus, Nigeria. Authors ’contributions OBE conceptualized, investigated, curated the research data, formally analyzed the research data, and wrote the originalmanuscript. TCO revised the manuscript. JCA andUCU supervised the project. Declarations Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. References Adelle C, Pereira L, Gorgens T, Losch B  Making sense together: the role of scientists in coproduction of knowledge for policy mak- ing. Sci Public Policy 47:1 –11.https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/ scz046 African Business  Startups lead the way on recycling in West Africa. https://african.business/2020/07/economy/startups-lead-the- way-on-recycling-in-west-africa/ . Assessed 28 Sept 2020 Agunwamba JC  Solid waste management in Nigeria: problems and issues. Environ Manag 22:849 –856.https://doi.org/10.1007/ s002679900152 Alford J  Engaging public sector clients: from service delivery to co-production. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke Aliu IR, Adeyemi OE, Adebayo O  Municipal household solid waste collection strategies in an African megacity: analysis ofprivate-public partnership performance in Lagos. Waste ManagRes 32:67 –78.https://doi.org/10.1177/2F0734242X14544354 Austin Z, Sutton J  Qualitative research: getting started. Can J Hosp Pharm 67:436 –440. https://doi.org/10.4212/2Fcjhp.v67i6. 1406 Bovaird T, Stoker G, Jones T, Loeffler E, Roncancio MP  Activating collective co-production of public services: influencing citizens to participate in complex governance mechanisms in theUK. Int Rev Adm Sci 82:47 –68.https://doi.org/10.1177/ 2F0020852314566009 Brudney JL, England RE  Towards a definition of the co- production concept. Public Adm Rev 43:59 –65.https://doi.org/ 10.2307/975300 Carey MA  Comment: concerns in the analysis of focus group data. Qual Health Res 5:487 –495. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 2F104973239500500409 Centobelli P, Cerchione R, Chiaroni D, Vecchio PD, Urbinati A  Designing business models in circular economy: a systematic liter- ature review and research agenda. Bus Strateg Environ 29:1734 – 1749. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2466 Clarence E  Technocracy reinvented: the new evidence-based pol- icy movement. Public Policy Adm 17:1 –11.https://doi.org/10. 1177/2F095207670201700301Environ Sci Pollut Res Coen D, Roberts A  A new age of uncertainty. Governance: An International Journal of Policy, Administrations and Institutions 25:5 –9.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0491.2011.01559.x Denzin NK, Lincoln YS  The sage handbook of qualitative re- search, 3rd edn. Sage, London Design Indaba.com  Pearl Recycling is turning Nigeria ’sd i s c a r d e d waste into stunning furniture and home décor. https://www. designindaba.com/articles/creative-work/pearl-recycling-turning-nigeria%E2%80%99s-discarded-w aste-stunning- furniture-and- home . Assessed 21 Mar 2021 Di Liddo G, Vinella A  Co-production in local public service delivery: the case of waste management. BE J Econ Anal Policy20:20190403. https://doi.org/10.1515/bejeap-2019-0403 Disrupt Africa  Nigeria ’s OkwuEco launched to simplify waste management, encourage recycling. https://disrupt-africa.com/2020/ 04/nigerias-okwueco-launched-to -simplify-waste-management- encourage-recycling/#:~:te xt=Nigeria's%20OkwuEco% 20launched%20to%20simplify%20waste%20management%2C%20encourage%20recycling,-0 &text=Nigerian%20startup% 20OkwuEco%20has%20launched,ahead%20of%20a%20full% 20rollout . Assessed 30 Sept 2020 EllenMacArthurFoundation  What is the circular economy? https:// www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/what-is-the-circular-economy . Assessed 31 Mar 2021 Ezeudu OB  Urban sanitation in Nigeria: the past, current and future status of access, policie s and institutions. Rev Environ Health 35:123 –137. https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2019-0025 Ezeudu OB, Ezeudu TS  Implementation of circular economy principles in industrial solid waste management: case studies from a developing economy . Recycling 4:42. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/recycling4040042 Ezeudu OB, Ozoegwu CG, Madu CN  A statistical regression method for characterization of household solid waste. A case studyof Awka municipality in Nigeria. Recycling 4:1. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/recycling4010001 Ezeudu OB, Agunwamba JC, Ugochukwu UC, Ezeudu, TS  Temporal assessment of municipal solid waste management inNigeria: prospects for circular economy adoption. Rev EnvironHealth https://doi.org/10.1515/reveh-2020-0084 Ezeudu OB, Agunwamba JC, Ezeudu TS, Ugochukwu UC, Ezeasor IC  Natural leaf-type as food packaging material for traditional food in Nigeria: sustainability aspects and theoretical circular econ- omy solutions. Environ Sci Pollut Res 28:8833 –8843. https://doi. org/10.1007/s11356-020-11268-z Failor T  Improving services and Improving lives: waste picker integration and municipa l coproduction in Pune, India. Dissertation. University of North Carolina. https://doi.org/10. 17615/wr67-d492 Ferronato N, Rada EC, Portillo MAG, Cioca LI, Ragazzi M, Torretta V  Introduction of the circular economy within developing re-gions: a comparative analysis of advantages and opportunities forwaste valorization. J Environ Manag 230:366 –378. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.09.095 Frissen V, van Standen M, Huijboom M, Kotterink B, Kuipers M, Kuipers M, En Koninkrijksrelaties MVBZ  Naar eenUserGenerated State? De impact van nieuwe media voor overheid enopenbaar bestuur. TNO, Delft Gollagher M, Hartz-Karp J  The role of deliberative corroborative governance in achieving sustainable cities. Sustainability 5:2343 – 2366. https://doi.org/10.3390/su5062343 Governance International  Co-production. https://www.govint.org/ our-services/co-production/ . Assessed 30 Sept 2020 Guardian  ‘Its money lying in the streets ’: meet the woman transforming recycling in Lagos. Published 21 October 2015.https://www.theguardian.com/ci ties/2015/oct/21/money-lying-streets-meet-woman-transformin g-recycling-lagos-wecyclers . Assessed 28 Sept 2020 Gutberlet J  More inclusive and cleaner cities with waste manage- ment co-production: Insights from participatory epistemologies and methods. Habitat Int 46:234 –342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. habitatint.2014.10.004 Hammarberg K, Kirkman M, deLacey S  Qualitative research methods: when to use them and how to judge them. Hum Reprod 31:498 –450. https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/dev334 Hoornweg D, Bhada-Tata P  What a waste: a global review of solid waste management. 842 Urban development series; knowledge pa-per no 15. 2012 World Bank, Washington, D.C. 843. https:// openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/17388 Assessed 1 Oct 2020 Howlett M, Ramesh M  The Achilles heels of collaboration: over- coming critical capacity deficits in collaborative governance ar-rangement? Paper presented at NUS-FPZG UNESCO Chair Workshop on the Governance of Collaboration: Co-production, Contracting, Commissioning and Certification, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Iorhemen OT, Alfa MI, Onoja SB  The review of municipal solid waste management in Nigeria: the current trend. Adv Environ Res 5:237–249. https://doi.org/10.12989/aer.2016.5.4.237 Landi S, Russo S  Co-production ‘thinking ’and performance im- plications in the case of separate waste collection. Public Manag Rev:1 –25.https://doi.org/10.1080/14719037.2020.1823726 Lember V, Brandsen T, Tonurist P  The potential impacts of digital technologies on co-production and co-creation. Public Manag Rev21:1665 –1686. https://doi.org/10 .1080/14719037.2019. 1619807 Lincoln YS, Guba EG  Naturalistic Inquiry, vol 75. Sage, Beverly Hills Linders D  From e-government to we-government: defining a ty- pology for citizen co-production in age of social media. Gov Inf Q 29:446 –454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2012.06.003 Lu H, Sidortsov R  Sorting of a problem: a co-production approach to household waste management in Shangai, China. Waste Manag95:271 –277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2019.06.020 Made F, Ntlebi F, Kootbodein T, Wilson K et al  Illness, self-rated health and access to medical care among waste pickers in landfill sites in Johannesburg, South Africa. Int J Environ Res Public Health 17:2252. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17072252 Mangai MS, De Vries MS  Co-production as deep engagement: improving and sustaining access to clean water in Ghana andNigeria. Int J Public Sector Manage 31:81 –96.https://doi.org/ 10.1108/IJPSM-03-2017-0084 McLafferty I  Focus group interviews as a data collecting strategy. J Adv Nurs 48:187 –194. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648. 2004.03186.x Mclaren D, Agyeman J  Sharing cities: a case for truly smart and sustainable cities. MIT Press, Cambridge, USA Miles MB, Huberman AM  Qualitative data analysis, a source book of new methods. Sage, Beverlyhill Morseletto P  Targets for a circular economy. Resour Conserv Recycl 153:104553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019. 104553 Mukherjee I, Mukherjee N  Designing for sustainable outcomes: espousing behavioral change into co-production programmes. Polic Soc 37:326 –346. https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2018. 1383032 Nabatchi T, Sancino A, Sicilia M  Varieties of participation in public services: the who, when and what of coproduction. PublicAdm Rev 77:766 –776. https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.12765 Ngan SL, How BS, Teng SY, Promentina MAB, Yatim P, Er AC, Lam HL  Prioritization of sustainability indicators for promotingthe circular economy: the case of developing countries. RenewEnviron Sci Pollut Res Sustain Energy Rev 111:314 –333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser. 2019.05.001 Nnaji CC  Status of municipal solid waste generation and disposal in Nigeria. Management of Environmental Quality: An InternationalJournal 26:53 –71.https://doi.org/10.1108/MEQ-08-2013-0092 Nzeadibe TC, Ajaero CK  Development impact of advocacy ini- tiatives in solid waste management in Nigeria. Environ Dev Sustain13:163 –177. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-010-9254-8 Ogwueleka T  Municipal solid waste characterization and manage- ment in Nigeria. Iran J Environ Health Sci Eng 6:173 –180 Ostrom E  Crossing the great divide: co-production, synergy and development. World Dev 24:1073 –1087. https://doi.org/10. 1016/0305-750X00023-X Parks RB, Baker PC, Kiser L, Oakerson R, Ostrom V, Wilson R  Consumers as co-producers of public services: some economic andinstitutional considerations. Policy Stud J 9:1001 –1011. https:// doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0072.1981.tb01208.x Patton MQ  Qualitative research and evaluation methods, 3rd edn. Sage Patwa N, Sivarajah U, Seetharaman A, Sakar S, Maiti K, Hingorani K  Towards a circular economy: an emerging economies con- text. J Bus Res 122:725 –735.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020. 05.015 Pearlrecyling.com  Pear l recycling company website. https:// pearlrecycling.com.ng/ Assessed 28, Sept 2020 Perkins DN, Drisse MB, Nxele T, Sly PD  Ewaste: a global hazard. Ann Glob Health 80:286 –294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aogh.2014. 10.001 Powell RA, Single HM  Focus groups. Int J Quality Healthcare 8:499 –504. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/8.5.499 Sacirovic S, Ketin S, Vignjevic N  Eco-industrial zones in the context of sustainability development of urban areas. Environ Sci Pollut Res 26:24346 –24356. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018- 1390-y Scarlet N, Motola V, Dallemand JF, Monforti-Ferrario F, Mofor L  Evaluation of energy potential of municipal solid waste from African urban areas. Renew Sust Energ Rev 50:1269 –1286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.05.067 Siman RR, Yamane LH, Baldam RD, Tackla JP, de Assis Lesa SF, de Britto PM  Governance tools: improving the circular econo- my through the promotion of the economic sustainability of wastepicker organizations. Waste Manag 105:148 –169. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.wasman.2020.01.040 Singh A, Panchal R, Naik M  Circular economy potential of e- waste collectors, dismantlers and recyclers of Maharashtra: a casestudy. Environ Sci Pollut Res 27:22081 –22099. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11356-020-08320-3Solomon UU  The state of solid waste management in Nigeria. Waste Manag 29:2787 –2788. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman. 2009.06.030 Solutionsearch  Climate ch ange need behavior change-Pearl Recycling. Available online: https://solutionsearch.org/contests/ entry/70 Assessed 29 Sept 2020 Sorrentino M, De Marco M, Rossingnoli C  Health-care co-pro- duction: Co-creation of value in flexible boundary spheres. In:Borangiu T, Dragoicea M, Novia H  Exploring services sci- ence; 7 thinternational conference, IESS, 2016 . Berlin Springer, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32689-4_ 49 Sorrentino M, Sicilia M, Howlet M  Understanding co-production as a new public governance tool. Polic Soc 37:277 –293. https:// doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2018.1521676 Strauss A, Corbin J  Basics of qualitative research: techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory. Sage, Newbury Park The Recycler  Nigerian recycling facility enlists scavengers. Published March 12, 2018. https://www.therecycler.com/posts/ nigerian-recycling-facility-enlistsscavengers/#:~:text=Nigeria's%20new%20e%2Dwaste%20recycling,the%20processing%20of% 20e%2Dwaste .A s s e s s e d2 9S e p t2 0 2 0 ThisDay  Ewaste Recycler, Hinckley exports tonnes of hazardous phone batteries from Nigeria. Published 2 June 2020. https://www. thisdaylive.com/index.php/2020/06/02/ewaste-recycler-hinckley- exports-tonnes-of-hazardous-phone-batteriesfromnigeria/#:~:text= Ewaste%20Recycler%2C%20Hinckley%20Exports%20Tonnes%20of%20Hazardous%20Phone%20Batteries%20from%20Nigeria,-June%202%2C%202020&text=Niger ia's%20first%20ewaste% 20recycler%2C%20Hinckley,t o%20Belgium%20for%20safe% 20recycling . Assessed 29 Sept 2020 UNEP  Nigeria turns the tide on electronic waste. Available online: https://www.unenvironment.org/news-and-stories/press-release/ nigeria-turns-tide-e lectronicwaste#:~:te xt=The%20Nigerian% 20Government%2C%20the%20G lobal,of%20discarded% 20appliances%20every%20year .A s s e s s e d2 9S e p t2 0 2 0 Wecyclers.com  Recycle with Wecyclers. Available online: https:// www.wecyclers.com/ Assessed 21 Mar 2021 Wu J, Zhou X, Yan X, Wang F, Bai X, Li Y, Zhou J  Effects and improvement suggestions of green account system for waste classi-fication and reduction in Shanghai. J Shanghai Univ  22: 197–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.12.107 Yin RK  Case study research: design and method. Sage, Newburry Park Publisher ’sn o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic- tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Environ Sci Pollut Res 

