In this section, the four cases are compared and analysed. Based on the combined analysis of the literature and the empirical
ﬁndings, a conceptual framework is proposed linking the 24 challenges to a set of levers to overcome them.
Table 10provides a cross-case comparison, summarising the challenges associated to each case.
It is worthwhile to note that all the 24 challenges have appeared at least in one case, while only one, i.e. ‘product
technology improvement’, appeared in all cases. Given the different roles and activities covered by the investigated com-
panies, which range from product design and manufacturing to end-of-use renovation, the empirical investigation conﬁrms
the distribution of CE challenges among the different lifecycle phases and supply chain actors emerged from the literature(Table 9). Consequently, the need for a systemic and holistic approach when supply chain are redesigned for CE is supported
by this study (Lieder and Rashid 2016).
The ﬁndings suggest that a great degree of vertical integration by one actor in the supply chain is not a necessary
condition for CE implementation, differently from ﬁndings from previous research. In fact, each case has mainly focused
on one or few among the four CE building blocks, but they allow (each case alone and altogether) achieving economic,
environmental and societal beneﬁts at the aggregate level, thus contrasting previous ﬁndings that asserted the need of vertical
Table 10. Cross-case comparison: challenges pointed out in the cases.
Category ID Challenge Alpha Beta Gamma Delta N° of occurrences
Economic and ﬁnancial viability 1 Time mismatch between
revenue and cost
streamsXX 2
2 Financial risk X X 2
3 Operational risk X X 2
Market and competition 4 Cannibalisation X X X 3
5 IP and know-how access X 1
6 Brand Image X 1
Product characteristics 7 Fashion change X 1
8 Product complexity X X 2
9 Product (mass)
customisationXX 2
Standards and regulation 10 Taxation and incentives X X 2
11 Measures, metrics,
indicatorsX 1
12 Lack of standards X X 2
Supply chain management 13 Return ﬂows uncertainty X X 2
14 Transportation and
infrastructureXX 2
15 Availability of suitable
supply chain partnersXX X 3
16 Coordination and
information sharingX 1
17 Product traceability X 1
18 Cultural issue (linear
mind-set)X 1
Technology 19 Eco-efﬁciency of
technological processesX 1
20 Product technology
improvementXX X X 4
21 Data privacy and security X X 2
Users’ behaviour 22 Ownership value X X 2
23 Careless behaviour in
product usageXX 2
24 Users’ willingness to pay X X X 3
N° of challenges 14 12 9 10