In this section, cross -cutting aspects of the scenarios are discussed alongside 
aspects  that underpin the CE concept in the literature that are relevant to consider for 
further work relating to FMCG in the CE.  
  
5.1 Sustai nable -PSS and Service -Dominant l ogic 
The use of (presumed) sustainable product -service systems (sPSS s) (Mont, 2002)  
is widespread in the presented scenarios. FMCG businesses envision developing low -
impact services as they are able to ge t closer to what Tukker (2004)  defines as the most 
sustainable PSS model. For instance, most scenarios focus on process and relationship 
innovation that lead to a new value proposition that is typically realised through a 
service. This proposes a new way for FMCG industry to think about its offer, moving 
beyond the pr oduct, and seeing it as an integrated system of products and services in a 
wider service ecosystem.  
 Further the scenarios highlight the complexity of how and for whom the offer 
or value  is created within FMCG sPSSs. For example, in the Rise of Circular Re tailer 
scenario, customers, retailers, urban growers and local community are at the same time 
producers and beneficiaries of the new solution. This illustrates an ongoing shift in the 
logic used to design and develop new PSS value propositions. In particul ar a s hift from 
Goods -Dominant (G -D) logic to Service -Dominant (S -D) logic  (Vargo & Lusch, 2017)  
is apparent. The G -D logic perspective sees value embedded in a product which is 
delivered to the custome r and is exchanged for money. A customer is perceived as a 
passive value receiver and value destroyer in a business -to-customer interaction  (Vargo 
& Lusch, 2011) . In contrast, S -D logic suggests that the unit of exchange  is a service 
where that service is defined as either applied knowledge or skills, which is exchanged 
for another service that is needed. Value is no longer embedded in the goods, which are 
seen as service transmitters. Instead value is co -created, in an a ctor-to-actor exchange, 
where all actors can be providers and consumers of the service  (Ekman, Raggio, & 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT