With recent technological advancements and the gradual sway of industry and pub -
lic perceptions, biosolids, once classified as a ‘waste’ product fit only for disposal, are 
gaining prominence in their ability to function as a resource. The continued use of 
anaerobic digestion for sludge treatment along with advancements in co-digestion  
technology and the continuous improvements in WWTP efficiencies are pushing 
treatment facilities to become more energy positive. As previously mentioned, a 
number of WWTPs are currently energy positive and able to export energy in the 
form of excess heat and biogas into local networks to power industries and be 
used as domestic fuel. There is also significant investment and development of 
technologies for the production of liquid fuels from biosolids, able to supplement 
our need of fossil fuels. In future, it is expected that more of these facilities will be 
able to generate renewable energy to feed our power-hungry population centres 
and industries.
In addition to energy generation, biosolids use in agriculture to offset the need 
for synthetic fertilizers is receiving more attention as natural reserves become 
depleted. Despite the current economic hurdle of profitability, many developed 
nations are forming policies aimed at facilitating the development and adoption 
of efficient nutrient recovery technologies to safeguard domestic agricultural 
operations. Furthermore, in developing nations the use of biosolids on land is 
still considered the most economically viable option for treated sewage. With ever-
increasing coverage of wastewater networks across the developing world and the 
increasingly stringent environmental limits set in developed countries coupled 
with population growth, the production of biosolids is expected to increase pro -
portionately over time.
Biosolids use has the potential to affect national fuel and food supplies and 
global climate security. Significant fluctuations in fossil fuel and commodity 
prices in recent years has spurred investment into alternative fuels and fertiliz -
ers able to be decoupled from market forces. Moreover, the physical isolation of 
natural reserves of fossil fuels and mineral deposits in pockets around the world 
raises the question of continued accessibility to supplies. With regards to climate 
security, there is significant scientific evidence to show that the continued uti -
lisation of biosolids can offset significant amounts of carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere. This is achieved from the replacement of fossil fuels and the offset 
of synthetic fertilizers required for agriculture. Due to the fact that there is still 
significant capacity for agricultural land to accept biosolids, it is expected that the 
positive effects of utilizing biosolids for emissions offsets will grow.
Downloaded by Australian Catholic University At 01:35 09 April 2019 (PT)