The results obtained are promising with regard to the purity of the sorted waste
fractions, as the purity in almost all separated materials clearly exceeded the original
expectations with values up to 100%. However, the results for waste recovery were not
so successful as there were certain proportions where only 13% of recovery (textiles) (or
even less for aluminum) was achieved. The difﬁculties identiﬁed leading to these results
are related to the different composition and morphology of municipal waste compared
to construction and demolition waste, resulting in lower detection and therefore lower
sorting performance.
In addition, some challenges for the use of robots could be identified. A high-performance
communication data network is required that can be optimized by a 20 Mb/20 Mb data
network. For long waste pieces (e.g., textiles, foils, paper and cardboard) there are also
difficulties in the gripping process. The unstable inflow of waste is also a challenge that can be
solved with a measuring sensor. Finally , there is the problem of multi-layer and non-uniform
distribution of waste over the conveyor belt, which must be eliminated by adjusting the speed
conveyor and redesigning the robotic waste feeding system [4].
To date, the ZRR2 has achieved an average purity of 97% for all 13 waste streams
tested. Figure 5 shows the general results and the ﬁndings from the robot tests. In addition,
some measures have been identiﬁed that could improve the results of the robot sorting,
e.g., weekly updating of the sorter, mechanical modiﬁcation of the plant, improvement
of the software gripping strategy and adaptation of the waste sorting process, such as
the installation of a roller chute to support waste during the disintegration process, or
the redirection of part of the bulky waste stream (mainly closed bags) into the plant inlet,
which also reduces the amount of waste the robot has to process.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst scientiﬁc publication that presents empirical data on
the use of an AI-based robotic sorting system for mixed municipal waste, a comparison with
other robot systems should be the next step to validate these results. Further tests should
also investigate how the efﬁciency of recovery can be increased, by optimizing the process
parameters of the waste disposal plant, e.g., adjustment of the speed belt, distributor
belt and hopper arrangement. The main difﬁculties observed during the operation of
the robot were associated with the different composition and morphology of municipal