Reduction of FLW at each stage of the agri-food supply chain passes 
through the implementation of a CE approach (Vilariño et al., 2017). 
Technological solutions are one but fundamental piece of such ap
-
proach. Our study proposes a taxonomy of possible technological so -
lutions that clarifies the portfolio of technological options that are 
available for the different stages of the agri-food supply chain, with 
particular reference to the fruits and vegetables segment. The different 
technological solutions are linked to the different objectives to reach 
FLW reduction, then clarifying how different types of collaborations can 
reinforce the reaching of the different objectives pursued by the tech -
nological solutions. We have therefore enriched the discussion around the CE approach to tackle the challenge of FLW with some keys ele
-
ments related to: i) an overview of the state-of-the art technologies available to move up the FWH and to translate the concept of “pre
-
vention” in hands-on applications that are currently on the market; ii) the potential role of such technologies in limiting the loss of sustainable 
value embedded in food products; iii) how collaborations with tech
-
nology providers and vertical supply chain collaborations can facilitate the effectiveness of the technologies to reach FLW objectives. 
It must be said that, in our overview of the possible solutions, we 
have excluded “redistribution” (i.e. distribution of edible food to people 
in need) as an option, although it is a high priority practice especially 
for the social impact that it generates. Technologies are available also 
for supporting the challenging operations and logistics activities con
-
nected with the execution of such strategy, but they are mostly in the 
form of apps or web-platforms facilitating the effective communication 
among actors involved in the redistribution cycle and they can hence be 
considered less state-of-the art technologies. 
Moreover, moving down the ladder, despite the positive impact 
connected to the avoidance of the social impact of food waste, proces -
sing technologies can be considered lower priority for the F. Ciccullo, et al.   Resources, Conservation & Recycling 164 (2021) 105114
10