Returning to the questions that guide this study, to what extent
is the circular economy supporting the transition to a more sus-
tainable fashion industry? Can the CE help close the sustainability
loop? As Table 2 summarizes, this examination across the linear
take-make-waste model found that brands are working to adopt
sustainability-oriented practices that, in their view, align with a CE
mandate. However, when we interrogate these practices in more
detail, questions arise about the conceptualization and imple-
mentation of the CE in the Swedish fashion industry.
Moving across the take-make-waste model, examples of circular
practices include new design strategies (such as seasonless col-
lections) that may encourage consumers to keep and wear clothing
longer. For some industry segments, such as contemporary wom-
enswear and children ’s clothing, high-quality design was described
by interviewees as supporting circularity, while trend-driven
design and cost remain challenges for fast fashion brands.
Because the fashion industry largely lacks the technology
needed to produce new garments from old materials (cf. Paras et al.,
2019 ;Pringle et al., 2016 ), brands are working to quantify and
reduce the environmental impact of textile and garment produc-
tion. Clearly, the use of new raw materials contradicts circularity,given that textile production causes extensive CO2 emissions. Yet
the brands ’efforts at this stage still matter.
And although some brands are improving the quality of inputs,
such as transitioning from conventional to organic cotton, cotton
remains a highly water-and-chemical intensive ﬁbre ( Claudio,
2007 ). Moreover, under the current linear fashion system, brands
are not responsible for recycling that garment; they have little
incentive, therefore, to develop textiles constructed for circularity.
If the fashion industry adopted a more comprehensive view of the
CEefor example, where brands were responsible for garments at
the end of their life ecompanies might then act differently.
The issue of garment worker rights must also be emphasized.
While some brands have engaged in new partnerships to support
better conditions for garment workers, these initiative needs much
more effort. Many CE models seem to overlook the exploitation
built into industry supply chains. Brands should not prioritize
circularity at the expense of vulnerable workers ’welfare (cf.
Brydges and Hanlon, 2020 ).
With respect to waste, some brands have developed in-house
clothing rental and/or resale programs, while some consider part-
nerships with emerging second-hand businesses. Many companiesare actively encouraging consumers to take better care of their
clothes, such as by mending them or washing them less often. This
better treatment may contribute to circularity by extending the
garment ’s life, and these strategies share useful information.
However, they ultimately shift responsibility from brands to con-
sumers. Instead, there are more effective CE strategies, especially
given current R &D limitations, with respect to textile-to-textile
recycling ( Paras et al., 2019 ;Pringle et al., 2016 ;Rosa et al., 2019 ;
Sandvik and Stubbs, 2019 ). Methods of textile waste disposal, such
as downcycling and land ﬁll/incineration, present obvious material,
economic, and technological disadvantages. In contrast, upcycling
and direct-use are circular strategies better equipped to increase
clothing ’s lifespan ( Paras et al., 2019 ).
In recognizing differences in cultures of consumption ( Iran et al.,
2019 ;Machado et al., 2019 ), we must change our relationship to
garments. For example, there is little environmental bene ﬁtt o
producing a more circular garment (such as one made from recy-
cled textiles) if the buyer consumes it with a fast fashion mentality
(that is, wears it once or twice before disposing of it).
Taken together, the ﬁndings expose the tensions of transitioning
from linear to circular supply chains and the dif ﬁculties of retro-
ﬁtting existing business models to become more sustainable. This
research also illustrates the need to go beyond a focus on waste and
consider whether the implementation of CE principles aimed at
reducing environmental impact of the fashion industry at one stage
of supply chains can affect other stages. For example, the growing
efforts to extend garment life through targeted recycling or take-
back programs fail to address issues at earlier stages of supply
Table 2
Examples of CE practices emerging the Swedish case.
Stage Examples of CE practices from the Swedish case
Take /C15Promote the use of natural ﬁbres and reduce the use of fabric blends
/C15Quantify the environmental impact of production processes
/C15Reduce environmental impact of production, such as limiting waste water or amount of chemicals used in dying processes
/C15Relocate staff to work closer with suppliers of raw materials
Make /C15Transition from seasonal to seasonless collections
/C15Engage in design and branding practices that can support retention of product value on second-hand markets
/C15Build relationships with manufacturers to encourage more sustainable practices in garment manufacturing facilities
/C15Partner with intermediaries, to facilitate monitoring and oversight production facilities
Waste /C15Develop in-house clothing rental and/or resale programs, or partner with emerging businesses, to extend life of garments
/C15Encourage consumers to take better care of garments, such as washing clothing less often and/or mending
/C15Introduce or extend garment takeback programs
/C15Invest in textile recycling programs in order to support circularity and reduce land ﬁllT. Brydges Journal of Cleaner Production 293 (2021) 126245
6