of the Results
This study is focused on the collection activity of the reverse supply chain of the WEEE since it
represents a critical phase impacting the overall performance [6,41,42,52].
(1) A ﬁrst result of this research has underlined that a territorial divide exists in Italy about
the e-waste collection rate. In fact, even though the 70% of provinces have moved in the HWC,
almost3
4of these provinces are localized in Northern Italy. Furthermore, even though the provinces
in the LWC and MWC states have decreased over ten years, those that still remain in these states
are mainly Southern and Central of Italy provinces. This divide is also conﬁrmed by the fact that
almost all the provinces of the worst (“structurally blocked”) group are located in Southern Italy. It is
interesting to underline that such territorial divide could depend on the existence of a socio-economic
gap among Southern and Northern provinces. This ﬁnding conﬁrms the results of other authors [ 6]
about the Italian territorial divide even though this study shows more detailed evidences at provincial
level. On the contrary, the results about the best performers are not conﬁrmed since only one province
of this study is consistent with the best performing regions found by [6].
Similarly, the divide is conﬁrmed with regard to the Collection Centers. After 10 years, in a context
of a general shift towards medium and high states, Southern provinces are more than half of those
in the LPC state, although they remarkably decrease in MPC. Even though some positive elements
emerge (more southern presence in higher state), the territorial distribution is still uneven. This result
is coherent with other research that aims to optimize the distribution of the CCs in the territorial
areas [ 41,42]. Moreover, the results concerning the presence of a territorial divide in the Italian WEEE
collection are also consistent with those of other contributions, even if for a di erent stream of waste.
In fact, Agovino M. et al. [ 21] highlights that the legislative measures on a separate municipal waste
collection in Italy in the period 1999–2011, while increasing collection rates at the national level, do not
reduce the gap among provinces of di erent areas.
Moreover, the transition probability matrix analysis provides an explanation of this divide since it
shows the presence of a remarkable steady state condition which mirrors the di culty to carry out
structural investments aimed to increase the CCs. It is possible to claim that this is particularly true for
those provinces that, at the beginning of the introduction of a new EU WEEE management system,
halfway through the 2000–2010 decade, did not already have a WEEE collection infrastructure.
(2) As for the impact of external legislative events on the WEEE collection performance, a second
result emerged from the transition probability matrix analysis. In fact, the matrix shows that the increase
of provinces in the HWC state happened in two different periods due to two diverse external events
caused by legislative changes (the digital switchover and the entry into force of LD 49 /2014). These events
shocked the system provoking a rapid positive reaction. This result is consistent with the contribution
of [21].