and conclusions.
2. Research Framework
The research focuses on the presentation of the possible ways of CE’s implementation in municipal
waste management in Poland. The structure of the study includes a comprehensive literature review
on the CE approach in municipal waste management at the European level and a review of the waste
management system in Poland, including the actions taken by the Polish government in order to
transform the municipal waste management system into the CE model. Moreover, an inventory of
the actions towards the CE model in municipal waste management systems is presented based on the
ReSOLVE framework. The assumed research framework is presented in Figure 1, and a description of
the methods used in this paper is presented below.
Step 1: A comprehensive literature review, which includes the detailed description of municipal
waste management in Poland, was done with the use of the desk research method. The analysis was
done based on an overview of the European and national law restrictions (EUR-lex), the European
and national CE-related documents, and the available reviewed papers (Elsevier Scopus, Elsevier
ScienceDirect, Google Scholar). All of these items were selected with the use of a few keywords:
“Circular economy”, “CE”, “CE indicators”, “CE monitoring”, “waste management”, “municipal
waste”, “waste”, “zero waste”, and “recycling”. Important sources of data include the European CE
communications and directives, the Polish CE Roadmap, EU statistics reports and Polish statistical
reports. The results of the European CE indicators in Poland (based on the CE Monitoring Framework
of the EU) related to municipal waste were presented for two indicators (municipal waste production
per capita in the area of production and consumption, as well as municipal waste recycling in the area
of waste management). For this purpose, statistical data on municipal waste in Poland, published by
the Eurostat, were used. Data have been presented since 2014, i.e., since the initiation of the need to
switch to the CE model in the EU [1].
Step 2: Identiﬁcation and inventory of the set of actions supporting the transformation towards
the CE model in municipal waste management were done with the use of the method of synthesis
(combining distinguished factors), induction (deriving conclusions from the premises that are their