focus Reference Summary 
MPs Abbondanza and Souza (2019)  ≡MPs are the fastest growing e-waste items than CRT monitors, refrigerators and 
freezers, and CRT TVs 
Cai et al. (2020)  ≡On average, consumers use MP for 6 h per day 
Borthakur and Singh (2020)  ≡Although the potential life span of a mobile phone is around ten years, the present-day 
scenario is such that people will not use their phone longer. 
Bhatt et al. (2017)  ≡Consumers in different parts of India is also changing their MPs in 1–2 years. 
Thi˘ebaud et al. (2018)  ≡MPs’ service life is often connected to mobile phone contracts. Consumers ’ expected 
service life for MPs was four years, while, MPs became obsolete (no longer in use) 
after three years. 
Liu et al. (2019)  ≡The lifespan of MPs was considerably shorter than the technical life expectancy and 
reduced from 3 years to 1 year (within the analyzed period 2011 –2018) 
Cai et al. (2020)  ≡MPs’ service life is longer than the average life that included storage time 
Jayaraman et al. (2019)  ≡Modular repair work, for example, a broken screen of a mobile phone, could extend 
the product lifespan. 
Ongondo and Williams (2011)  ≡Network operators ’ motivations and management strategies were identified as one of 
the undiscovered investigations, with operator promoting a culture of quick new 
technology obsolescence and product upgrades, with this seen as necessary for 
network providers to retain consumers 
Comparison between small 
and LE Botelho et al. (2016) , Cao et al. (2016) , Chi et al. (2014) ,  
Echegaray and Hansstein (2017) , Ravindra and Mor 
(2019)  ≡Small IT equipment such as MPs, digital camcorders has a shorter lifespan (consumers 
changed every 2–3 years) than screens and LE such as TV sets, WM, and refrigerators 
Nowakowski (2016)  ≡The average lifespan for refrigerators was higher than for TV sets and WMs. 
Islam et al. (2016)  ≡Frequent repairing for refrigerators and TV sets was an economic burden for 
consumers, but essential to reach consumers ’ expected product lifespan rather than 
extend product lifespan   
≡most EEE used by the households were phased out within the product lifespan, and 
devices were updated within two-thirds of the products ’ designed lifespan. TV sets 
and computers were notable.   
≡the average lifespan of devices was three years, and old portable electronic devices 
have been replaced three times within the device ownership period 
Factors associated with 
product lifespan Zhang, L. et al. (2019)  ≡The product lifespan of SE is shorter among university students than the general 
population 
Shaikh et al. (2020)  ≡Lifespan of flat panel television, routers and modems, laptops, notebooks, and tablets 
were higher among women. 
Echegaray (2016)  ≡Individuals ’ past experiences with products (falling short of a reasonable lifetime) 
should relate to the informed decision making of consumers ’ expectations and specific 
product durability 
Pandebesie et al. (2019)  ≡EEE’s lifespan depends on the quality of the goods rather than the availability and 
quality of electricity. 
Product lifespan – an 
indicator for future 
planning Abbondanza and Souza (2019)  ≡Efficiency and efficacy of a take-back system largely depend on local data on product 
lifespan, required for future policy planning, especially location and capacity of WEEE 
dismantling units and WEEE collection routing. 
Chung et al. (2011)  ≡Regional data on product lifespan data is incredibly useful, and lifespan-related data 
collection methods should be more efficient and accurate 
Gok et al. (2017)  ≡Service life of product is inversely proportional to the quantity of EG 
Yin et al. (2014)  ≡Product service life is directly associated with energy and resource use  M.T. Islam et al.