Current studies about WTE in China have been limited in literature
and theoretical or case analysis, and the efficiency of WTE systems are
still unknown. Chinese government should use the minimum inputs,
such as capital and labor, to produce the maximum outputs, namely
energy. Therefore a comprehensive evaluation of the efficiency of differ-
ent options about how to turn waste into energy should be carried out.
More specific measures can be put forward to improve the efficiency
cost-effectively. In future work, the flowing method can be used to
figure out the efficiency of WTE systems of a decision-making unit.
Nonradial directional distance function, a type of data envelopment
analysis, is a useful method to evaluate the total factor environmental
performance and has been adopted to determine the efficiency of
resource utilization by many scholars ( Barros et al., 2012; Bian et al.,
2013; Sueyoshi and Goto, 2012; Wang et al., 2013 ).
Assume that K,L, and Ware capital stock, labor force, and waste,
respectively. These represent inputs of the production process. Y,E, and
Cmean GDP (good output), waste (good output), and CO 2emissions
(bad output), respectively. The joint production technology ( T) can be
obtained as
T5K;L;W;Y;E;C ðÞ :K;L;W ðÞ can produce Y;E;C ðÞ/C8/C9
(2.1)
The nonradial directional distance function is not only capable of
decreasing inputs/bad outputs and increasing good outputs simulta-
neously but also can adjust the inputs and outputs at different rates
(Zhou et al., 2012 ). In this regard, nonradial directional distance func-
tion has been widely adopted to evaluate total factor environmental per-
formance because of better discriminating power and improved
efficiency measurement. We denote the value of nonradial directional
distance function as ~ND K;L;W;Y;E;C;g/C0/C1
. Then the nonradial direc-
tional distance function can be expressed as ( Zhou et al., 2012 ):
ND-
K;L;E;Y;C;g/C0/C1
5sup wTβ:K;L;E;Y;C1g3diag βðÞ/C0/C1
AT/C8/C9
(2.2)37 2.4 Discussion
Waste-to-energy