The proposed integrative model suggests a framework that calls for 
proactive participation of all the three major stakeholders the govern -
ment, the corporates and the community to create a CE based urban 
society with the help of smart technology. Though literature has delved 
with the role that government has to play in developing and enforcing 
legislations and in spreading environmental consciousness and adopting 
sustainable practices, but pivotal role the urban communities can play 
by being the driver of change in the transition from linear to circular 
economy has largely been ignored. A smart technology enabled waste 
management model as suggested through our research will equip the 
citizens to create CE based model which will be beneficial to all 
stakeholders. 
The first research question we attempted to answer was how citizens 
can contribute towards circular economy. Sustained campaign towards 
awareness, facilitation workshops, interaction with practitioners, can 
raise motivation and sustained action of community leaders. For 
example: the managers of large residential societies can motivate action 
towards circular economy, sustainable management of domestic wastes 
and adoption of other green practices. They can communicate the 
tangible and intangible benefits for adopting such practices among the 
residents. Engaging children in such campaigns has been proved to be 
successful. Exemplary housing societies not only segregate dry, wet and 
toxic wastes, but also contribute in converting bio-degradable wastes 
into composting, sustainable use of sewage water, rain water harvesting, 
e-waste management, recycling of solid waste, tree plantation, energy 
conservation, cloth donation, bird feeding providing services to needy 
like people suffering during pandemic. They are also willing to mentor 
other housing societies. Kala and Bolia (2020) pointed out there should 
be proper communication policy for waste management for different 
socio-economic strata of citizens to spread awareness and ensure their 
participation in the waste management activities. Civilians and com-
munities can be the drivers of change towards circular economy. 
The next research question we attempted to answer is how new age 
technology can be leveraged towards MSW management and attainment 
of UN sustainable development goals. Our suggested model, The SoG-
ReIn (Social, Green initiatives, Resource use, & Innovation) R. Ajwani-Ramchandani and S. Bhattacharya