Our study demonstrates how DEA can be used for the aggrega-
tion of individual single indicators used in the MSW sector, or indi-
cators monitoring the transition to a more circular economy, with
indices capturing social factors, in order to construct environmen-
tal and circular economy performance measures. These measures
are not intended to substitute the traditional single indices, but
to complement them, offering a deeper insight on the countries’
performance.
It is noteworthy, that a major advantage of DEA is that it applies
the ‘‘beneﬁt of the doubt approach”. This is manifested by the use
of a maximization function and the attribution, endogenously, of
weights to each variable, so as to reveal the maximum overall per-
formance for each country. Moreover, DEA will not recognize anefﬁcient unit as inefﬁcient. In addition, the endogenous attribution
of weights, for any country and any indicator, ensures that this
method is not subject to speciﬁc normative preferences, which is
a concern when constructing composite indicators by other tech-
niques. Therefore, countries cannot claim that a poor relative per-
formance is due to a harmful or unfair weighting scheme. The
resulting ranking of the EU countries, with respect to these mea-
sures, can be a valuable tool for policymakers. By recognizing the
most efﬁcient countries, their best practices can be learnt and
adopted by the inefﬁcient ones, in order to improve not only
MSW management, but also the cyclicality of their economy, both
at a national level and for EU as a whole.
Our models for both years, showed that the vast majority of
countries in the sample do not perform well, although, on average,
EU(26) has shown improvement both in environmental and circu-
lar economy performance. The performance gaps between the efﬁ-
cient and less efﬁcient countries are signiﬁcant, suggesting that the
latter countries have the potential for large improvements. There-
fore, inefﬁcient countries should learn from the waste policy and
sustainable materials management, implemented by those identi-
ﬁed as efﬁcient, like Belgium. As an example, the waste policy of
Belgium includes a mix of instruments, like subsidies, awareness
raising campaigns, levies, recycling fees, landﬁlling and incinera-
tion bans etc. It is also worth noting that the ‘‘polluter pays” prin-
ciple is ﬁrmly embedded in the Belgian waste management policy.
Even households are charged, based on the volume or weight of
their waste, while tariffs are differentiated, so that mixed house-
hold waste is more expensive to discard than selectively collected
waste ( inno4sd.net, 2019 ). In addition, Belgium has a dense net-
work of reuse shops, while the state subsidizes those municipali-
ties that launch waste prevention initiatives ( UN, 2019 ).
It should be noted that a limitation of DEA is its inability to offer
a prediction model of the country’s maximum performance, sincesuch a theoretical maximum cannot be determined ( Othman
et al., 2010 ). This happens because the performance scores are rel-
ative and based on the speciﬁc dataset. However, this means that
even the countries that have been revealed as efﬁcient, have plenty
of room for improvement. This fact is recognized by the policymak-
ers of Flanders, Belgium. Despite of their up-to date success, they
are pushing forward an ambitious waste prevention program, aim-
ing at a notable reduction in household waste to 116–258 kg, per
inhabitant per year, by 2022, depending on each municipality’s
socio-economic factors ( European Environmental Agency, 2016 ).
A ﬁnal limitation of the DEA technique is its sensitivity to the
presence of outliers, due to its inherent determinism. However,
no outliers were observed in our particular data set, as evidenced
by the descriptive statistics of the inputs and outputs. If such
countries-outliers had been observed, they would have been
excluded from the analysis.
Our input/output models are far from perfect. However, accord-
ing to our opinion, they meet at least four of the ﬁve RACERrequirements for indicators i.e. the criterion of relevance, accept-
ability, credibility, easiness and robustness ( Srebotnjak et al.,
2009 ). Also, we believe they meet the criterions suggested in the
European Commission‘s Impact Assessment Guidelines ( EC,
2009 ). According to these Guidelines, a scientiﬁc tool must be
robust (not easily manipulated) and relevant (closely linked to
the objectives to be reached). It is our view that our DEA based
frameworks are robust, in the sense that all DMUs (countries) are
assessed upon the same set of inputs and outputs, which are mea-
sured on a quantitative basis using data obtained from ofﬁcial
sources. Moreover, since the overall objective is to measure rela-
tive environmental and circular economy performance, we feel
that this framework is certainly relevant, since it provides an efﬁ-
ciency score for each country, expressing its performance in com-
parison to other countries. Results have a clear interpretation andare easy to comprehend even by non-experts. The proposed DEA
models are easy to apply and provide the efﬁciency scores for all
countries in negligible time. All these aspects make this evaluation
framework a versatile tool for monitoring the performance of each
country in comparison to others and for identifying policy
objectives.
Finally, we should note that limitations of available data and
indicators introduce an element of uncertainty when comparing
across countries since the results of any model incorporating sta-
tistical data depend on their reliability and comparability.
Although a fairly high degree of comparability between countries
has been already achieved for the
EC (2016) , any improvement
and harmonization in the statistical reporting by the EU countries
(Eurostat, 2017 ) would be beneﬁcial for any comparative analysis.
6. Conclusions
Summing up, the results of our study show that there are large
disparities among EU countries, with respect to their environmen-
tal and circular economy performance. Interestingly though, the
borders between Western and Eastern Europe, but not between
the north and the south, have fallen: old EU members, such as
Spain or France, perform signiﬁcantly worse, both from an environ-
mental and a circular economy perspective, than newer member
states such as Slovenia or Poland, while southern countries like
Cyprus and Greece remain among the worst performers, with
respect to both performance measures.
At the same time, while countries like Denmark or Finland seem
to be committed for the present to incineration, other countries
like Slovenia have the potential to rise among the top environmen-
tal and circular economy performers, by exploiting the lack of such
commitments, further reducing waste generation levels, increasingrecycling and transforming their industrial methods in order to
better exploit recyclable materials. Finally, with regards to the
results of the present study, Belgium emerges as the best environ-
mental and circular economy performer, surpassing Germany and
the Netherlands, despite their achievements in MSW recycling.
Future achievements in environmental and circular economy
performance can go hand in hand with the improvement of a coun-
try’s social progress and create a kind of positive feedback loop.
The shift towards a circular economy has the potential to boost
economic growth by promoting innovation, creating more jobs
and enhancing economic competitiveness. In turn, the positive
economic and social advances, depicted by a higher social progress
index, can be substantiated into more efﬁcient waste management
and can be used to strengthen the shift of the economy, since, as
we discussed earlier, a higher Social Progress index is connected
to stronger pro-environmental attitudes and stimulated social
activity, factors that are necessary for achieving better results in
environmental and cyclical economy performance.188 O. Giannakitsidou et al. / Waste Management 109 (2020) 181–191