Institutional work conducted by food waste start-ups plays an im-
portant role in the transition towards a CE. In this article, we demon-
strate the nature and types of this work within four categories (ap-
pearance of food, edibility of food, quantity of food and living with
food). This work is able to boost CE resource loops by inventing variousnew ways to reduce existing food waste as well as to reuse and recyclesurplus food and to create new value for businesses ( Bocken et al.,
2016 ) However, the start-ups are not only creating and exploiting
business opportunities but also changing the food system. Through
adopting the institutional perspective, this study goes beyond ex-
amining resource ﬂows to account for the interplay of the actors and
structures surrounding them that eventually enable the transition to aCE.
Ourﬁndings extend recent research on food waste start-ups that
mediate amongst the food SC actors, redistributing food with the help
of digital platforms and mobile applications ( Ciulli et al., 2019; Harvey
et al., 2019). While these studies have focused on how the start-ups thatutilise digitalisation in ﬂuence the food SC, our ﬁndings elaborate on the
impact of these actions on the institutional environment more holi-stically. They also extend the circular business model literature ( Pieroni
et al., 2019) by focusing on the societal, institutional environmentwherein businesses, especially born sustainable start-ups, operate, ra-
ther than on the organisational elements of the business model as such.
Consequently, our ﬁndings go beyond analysing CE business models to
consider the role of the new start-ups in social and institutional change.
The institutional work detailed in our ﬁndings particularly relates to
the normative and cultural-cognitive pillars of institutions ( Scott,
2008 ). While the CE literature has focused more on the regulative pillar
(Ranta et al., 2018), the other two pillars are also important in the
transition, and start-ups may have an in ﬂuential role in them. Studies
on institutional work often concentrate on how institutions are createdand disrupted to enact institutional change ( Zvolska et al., 2019 ), but
we support the view that maintenance work is also important, espe-cially in supporting the newly emerging institutions ( Vargo et al.,
2015 ). Ourﬁndings also show that, in many cases, the di ﬀerent forms of
institutional work are occurring simultaneously; for example, educating
and valorising can be utilised together to inform customers and the
public about the positive aspects of the start-up's business model andmission. In the following section, we further elaborate on our ﬁndings.
5.1. Empowering other actors through institutional work
Ourﬁndings show that the institutional work conducted by the
start-ups results in empowering other actors in the food system to re-
duce food waste. Our ﬁndings thus highlight the connections between
the actors engaged in institutional work and their interplay ( Beunen &
Patterson, 2019 , p. 24). Empowerment happens, for example, through
the rede ﬁnition of actors' roles ( Koskela-Huotari et al., 2016). Actors
that are usually considered peripheral to the CE transition, such as
kitchen sta ﬀ, retail store employees and consumers, gain agency
through solutions provided by the start-ups. Our ﬁndings
also provide
empirical support for the suggestion that engaging citizens in CE
through their everyday practices (e.g. Hebrok & Heidenstrøm, 2019;
Hobson, 2016; Mylan et al., 2016 )i sa ne ﬀective way to bring about
institutional change. A recent study suggested that consumers may be
willing to participate in closing CE loops if su ﬃciently incentivised
(Borrello, Caracciolo, Lombardi, Pascucci, & Cembalo, 2017 ). Through
MyFoody, for instance, retail store employees who are concerned about
food waste ( Gruber et al., 2016 ) gain a concrete tool to manage it.
Furthermore, through using Ovie, Mimica Touch and CozZo, consumersparticipate in the practice of date labelling, previously reserved ex-
clusively for the food packaging industry. Many of the solutions operate
through mobile applications, which have been found to give consumers
agency and the capacity to act ethically in their personal or professional
lives ( Fuentes & Sörum, 2019 ), not only as users but also as doers of
sustainable practices ( Mylan et al., 2016 ). At the heart of these practices
is the reframing of food waste as a resource: instead of being seen as a
cost, it becomes an economic resource for generating revenue and a
symbolic resource for creating social and environmental value.E. Närvänen, et al. Industrial Marketing Management xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
9