and sensitivity analysis for parameters  p and d 
The main conceptual difference between the new vers ion of the RBR and the RCBR indicator 
proposed in this paper is that the RCBR indicator d oes not account for the incineration of the first 
product α 0 in the reference situation in which it is not recy cled. This is because the focus of the RCBR 
indicator is on the new product designer’s perspect ive instead of the previous product’s end-of-life 
or waste perspective. However, from a life cycle pe rspective we can conclude that the RBR indicator 
is more comprehensive than the RCBR indicator. Beca use we accounted (in both indicators), in 
addition to the burdens of incineration, for the be nefits of incineration, i.e. the avoided burdens of  
average virgin electricity and heat produced in Bel gium, the LCI dataset for the avoided electricity 
and heat production has an important influence on t he RBR result. A sensitivity analysis for the 
electricity and heat LCI dataset is out of the scop e of this paper. 
Because the contribution of injection moulding to t he life cycle impact of the green roof tile is larg e 
(see section 3.2.1), also the LCI dataset for injec tion moulding may play an important role in the 
indicator results. The many factors influencing the  energy consumption of injection moulding (e.g. 
installed machine power, cycle time, part maximum t hickness, etc.) (Ribeiro et al., 2015) are not 
reflected in the average ecoinvent LCI dataset that  was used in this case study. It must be taken into  
account that the solid waste fraction considered in  this study originated largely from extrusion 
products (foils, trays, etc.). Extrusion-grade mate rials typically have high viscosities, while inject ion 
moulding grades have low viscosities, allowing them  to be injected into the cavity with little 
resistance. The particularly high energy consumptio n for injection moulding in this study is due to th e 
fact that a mixture of extrusion-grade secondary ma terials were used for an injection moulding 
product. Should the source material be injection gr ade (like ELV or WEEE polymers) or should the 
chosen new product be an extrusion product (like pl astic boards for a picnic bench), energy 
consumption would be reduced drastically. The virgi n PP from the comparison is an injection-grade. 
As such, we risk a skewed perception that the mater ial being recycled would be a cause for higher 
energy consumption, while in fact it is the viscosi ty of the sourced polymers. 
In this case study, we have assumed that the collec tion efficiency for the green roof tile is 100%, 
going either to incineration or recycling. It is, h owever, important to note that the building’s end o f 
life is complex and that the material’s recovery la rgely depends on the functioning of the local 
collection scheme. For cases where the collection e fficiency is lower than 100%, future adjustments 
of the equations should account for additional mate rial losses. 
Figure 4 presents a sensitivity analysis for parame ters p and d in Eq. 4-7. A table with results, 
including the results for the ReCiPe Midpoint impac t categories that are not presented in Figure 4, 
can be found in the supporting information. 
In the presented results of the case study (section  3.2.1) parameters p and d were both equal to 1 in 
both the first and the second cascade. Figure 4 com pares the latter results with three other 
scenarios, i.e. (i) p=0.8; d=1 to show the effect o f parameter p, (ii) p=1; d=2 to show the effect of 
parameter d, and (iii) p=0.8; d=2 to show the combi ned effect of parameters p and d. Decreasing 
parameter p from 1 to 0.8 means a 20% reduction in the proportion of recycled material in the green 
roof tile. Reducing parameter p and keeping paramet er d equal to 1 shows always a reduction in the 
environmental benefits of the recycling scenario co mpared to the incineration scenario for all impact 
categories/endpoints and for all indicators (Figure  4 A-D). Increasing parameter d from 1 to 2 stands 
for a 50% reduction in the lifetime of the green ro of tile made from recycled material compared to 
the green roof tile made from virgin material. Rais ing parameter d and keeping parameter p equal to 
1, however, shows a reduction or an increase in the  environmental benefits of the recycling scenario 
compared to the incineration scenario depending on the impact category/endpoint. The ReCiPe 
Endpoints Human Health  and Natural Ecosystems  show a decrease when raising parameter d and 
keeping parameter p equal to 1 for all indicators ( Figure 4 A-D). On the other hand the CEENE total  
impact category and the ReCiPe Endpoint Natural Resources  increase. An increase in the 
environmental benefits of the recycling scenario co mpared to the incineration scenario means that 
the increased benefits of avoided virgin electricit y and heat production due to incinerating 2 recycle d