and Conclusions 
In our article, we reviewed the sustainability  and circular economy aspects of short supply 
chains (SSCs) through a literature review. 
The sustainability of food chains is linked to the dimensions of the environment, economy, 
society, and consumers’ welfare [25]. We collected  55 concepts or factors that well describe the 
sustainability and circular economy implications of short supply chains along these four dimensions. On their base, the cross-section of the four di mensions is the “environ mentally and socially 
sustainable production and consumption”. This term  indicates that, in our experience, supply chains 
generally can be brought into connection with sustainable production and consumption by the 
aspects of health, well-being, community, producers and consumer behavior, reduced waste and pollutant emission. Furthermore, the organisa tion and efficiency of short chains can be 
fundamentally affected by governmental support or regulatory policies. The effective operation of circular economic aspects requires the supporting behavior of producers and individual consumers. 
The principles of the circular economy regard ing food chains include minimising waste and 
surplus, reusing food, nutrient recycling, and pr omoting more varied and effective dietary patterns 
[5]. Although the concept of short supply chains is  not based on waste reduction, in our experience, 
they can contribute to the prevention of food waste, and in this way, to the objectives of the circular 
economy. The trade of fresh products, with shor ter shelf-lives, moderate packaging usage, flexible 
package sizes, and possibly more conscious cu stomer behavior may contribute to the waste 
Figure 2. Possible positive e ects of short supply chains on the circular economy and sustainability
goals. Source: Own editing (used “coggle.it”), based on the literature review
5. Discussion and Conclusions
In our article, we reviewed the sustainability and circular economy aspects of short supply chains
(SSCs) through a literature review.
The sustainability of food chains is linked to the dimensions of the environment, economy, society,
and consumers’ welfare [ 25]. We collected 55 concepts or factors that well describe the sustainability
and circular economy implications of short supply chains along these four dimensions. On their base,
the cross-section of the four dimensions is the “environmentally and socially sustainable production
and consumption”. This term indicates that, in our experience, supply chains generally can be brought
into connection with sustainable production and consumption by the aspects of health, well-being,
community, producers and consumer behavior, reduced waste and pollutant emission. Furthermore,
the organisation and e ciency of short chains can be fundamentally a ected by governmental support
or regulatory policies. The e ective operation of circular economic aspects requires the supporting
behavior of producers and individual consumers.