For a cross country comparison, the cumulative amounts of e-waste 
generation on these islands and the generated e-waste per capita have been demonstrated. It is estimated that Trinidad and Tobago generates 
the largest e-waste quantity, whereas Grenada produces the lowest 
amount. Including the population data, Aruba and Jamaica are the 
biggest and smallest generators of e-waste per capita respectively. To 
better understand the e-waste generation pattern, data has been com
-
piled with statistical testing on factors of influence. The hypothesis that relatively faster-growing population countries or more economically 
progressive islands would have higher e-waste generation rates. GDP 
per capita (in purchasing power parity [PPP]) has also been included to 
test for affluence, to see if it is a significant driver of e-waste generation. 
6.1. Total e-waste generated on the five islands 
Between 2019 and 2025, it is estimated that at least 363 kt of new e- 
waste will be generated cumulatively in these five islands, bringing the 
total in-use e-waste stock to 683 kt. Getting rid of the newly generated 
e-waste (of 363 kt) alone would require a total of 14,600 containers, 
each 20-ft in size (or 6.6 containers a day) leaving these islands. 
Considering that this amount is generated by only 11% of the Caribbean 
population, the total e-waste amount from the region is several times 
fold. Exporting the e-waste imposes two types of costs to an island's 
economy: 1) collection, handling and shipping costs and 2) the lost 
opportunity in terms of revenue and income that could potentially be 
generated from material recycling. There is yet another cost (in terms of 
social and environmental externalities) that would be borne by coun
-
tries receiving this e-waste, in most cases the less developing countries. 
The e-waste generation distribution (flow) over the five islands is 
illustrated in Fig. 7 for the period of 2019 to 2025. Trinidad and Tobago 
will have the highest e-waste generation quantity, while the population and available land area of this island country is less than half that of 
Jamaica. Therefore, it is expected that Trinidad and Tobago will 
Fig. 5. Amount of electrical and electronic equipment's Put-on-Market (grey area) and the corresponding e-waste (bars) for Trinidad &Tobago - 2000 to 2025.  E. Mohammadi, et al.   Resources, Conservation & Recycling 164 (2021) 105106
7