The research data was analyzed using the iterative process of ca se comparison and the results 
are discussed below.  
Figure 3. Packaged pure water from the factory.
Pulp and Paper Industry
As at 1970s and 1980s, Nigeria still had a viable paper and pulp industry which, at its optimal
performance, could satisfy domestic paper demand in the country. However, the collapse of the
government-owned integrated paper mills was due to factors largely attributed to the unavailability of
long-pulp ﬁber in the Nigerian forest. Since that time, there has been an incredibly large dependency
on imported pulp and ﬁnished paper material across the country. Further, local paper production
in Nigeria has been experiencing enormous challenges [ 28]. Currently, the paper consumption
and demand across the country have been on the increase and this demand is mostly met through
importation. The Raw Material Research and Development Council is a paramount government
agency responsible for advising the government on alternative sources of local material for sustainable
industrial growth. The council once attributed this high demand and consumption of paper and
paper products in Nigeria to the Universal Basic Education (UBE) scheme embarked on by the federal
government to improve the literacy level of Nigerians [ 68]. On the other hand, a variant of paper
products popularly called tissue or toilet roll in Nigeria has also been in high demand and consumption
due to its essential use in sanitation and hygiene. This product has been tagged among the fast-selling
and most proﬁtable products in the country and its production depends more on recycled ﬁber than
virgin ﬁber materials. However, there has never been any popular policy or practice designed for
optimal recovery of paper waste in the country for onward recycling.
The large volume of paper and paper material generated across the country is either burnt in
the backyard, buried in the landﬁlls or in an open dump across the country [ 28]. Informal paper
recycling has been reported to be in practice in Nigeria, where due to economic hardship, households
and o ces store up used newspapers for sale to scavengers when the value is perceived to be high [ 13].
Furthermore, there is a practice of reusing paper for secondary alternative purposes such as the
wrapping of food items, gift material and for other packaging purposes. These practices exist in
the country but without any formal data documentation. No independent government agency is
solely responsible for the regulation of the paper and pulp industry in Nigeria. As part of the general
industry, the pulp and paper industry follows the general industrial guideline as issued by the National
Environmental Standards and Regulations Enforcement Agency (NESREA).