) focuses on the implementation of 84 
Figure 1. The most important milestones in the development of the circular economy (CE) concept.
However, it was the 2012 report on the circular economy by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation that
gave this concept a real promotional boost [11].
According to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, the circular economy is a regenerative economy,
which aims to keep materials and products at their highest usefulness. In other words, the CE concept
is almost a waste-free production that aims to reduce waste and pollution.
In 2018, the Global Circularity Report announced that only 9% of the world economy was
circular [ 12]. Due to the complexity of the sustainable development vision, most often its implementation
needs to be supported by innovation designers and intermediaries. They provide services and designs
ushering appropriate radical changes in practices, policies, and decision-making tools [13,14].
Many countries adopted the principles of the CE as part of their future strategies. For example,
the CE is promoted as a top-down national political objective in China, while, in other areas and
countries such as the European Union, Japan, United States of America (USA), and Russia, it is a
tool to design bottom-up environmental and waste management policies. It means that a major
role in waste management systems belongs not to the government but to the di erent stakeholders
involved in waste management systems such as business companies that generate waste or participate
in waste management systems, municipalities managing household waste, and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) o ering education, promotion, and support in implementation of CE and waste
management practices.
The ultimate purpose of the paper is to evaluate to what extent the waste management as a part
of the CE is implemented in Russia by companies in di erent sectors of the economy and if it can solve
the issue of reducing the environmental impact of the business economic system in Russia.
The main subject of this paper is waste management implementation practices as the initial stage
of implementing the principles of the CE in Russia.
The paper provides a brief theoretical overview of the evolution of the CE concept, its origins,
and its relationship with the sustainability and growth patterns that until now challenged the present
models of economic development. It summarizes the evolution and current state of state regulation in
the ﬁeld of CE in Russia with special attention to waste management; it also evaluates the experience of
implementing the waste management approaches by business companies in Russia based on selected
case studies and, as a result, o ers a list of roles of waste management system stakeholder roles and
waste management strategies. Finally, the paper considers the challenges and opportunities for the
waste management in Russia.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 (Materials and Methods) provides details about the
methods used for the literature review and the main characteristics of the studies selected for this
review. This section also lists the companies chosen for the case study of best available techniques in