on Sustainable 
Development in India by CE
Given the rise in consumerism, the best opportunity 
for developing economies is to redefine sustainable 
development in a manner appropriate to their 
context and culture. While developing policies to 
maximize social welfare and simultaneously reducing 
environmental impacts, the threat could be a fixation 
on ‘industrialization – pollution – remediation’ cycle.44 
Together with unawareness about the inadequate impacts of green consumerism, a lack of vision to transition 
towards sustainable policy development and enforcement 
may settle in.45 As seen in the current research, a lack of 
awareness exists among local urban bodies to completely 
implement recycling programs. 
The  Green living survey mentioned earlier projected 
the high awareness levels of  Indian citizen towards adopting 
green products. Even though green consumerism is a 
costly affair for the consumer, organizations make many 
trade-offs to ensure eco-friendliness of such products. 
The debate continues on consumers’ attachment to price 
tags: high price green products affordable for higher 
income group, with a majority of the Indian population 
in middle-class consumers’ ‘value for money’ mentality 
and the poor who struggle to satisfy daily needs. Even 
though the green products awareness levels are high, 
the confidence level of people in purchasing the green 
products is very low because they are unsure about the 
nature of eco-friendliness of the product. The overall 
growth of consumerism leading to increased waste 
generation especially in Indian cities and the related but 
limited potential of green consumerism to curb urgent 
eco-issues argues in favor of CE. Thus, green consumerism 
is summarized as inadequate and not a comprehensively 
feasible solution for sustainable development of India. 
Considering future policy initiatives for sustainability, 
strategic attempts by Indian companies to translate global 
sustainability challenges into opportunities for businesses 
were suggested.46 Frameworks to develop synergized efforts 
for sustainability need to be developed.47 Considering the 
emerging economy of India with increased consumerism 
and the related challenges due to rapid increases of urban 
waste aptly translates into opportunities for development 
of sunrise industry sectors in WM. Although composite 
environmental, social and economic practices may be 
in place to comply with corporate social responsibility 
requirements, further sustainability policy enhancements 
are required from GOI. A better strategy to curb eco-
damages is observed in the CE approach. 
The CE approach encompasses green consumerism 
within its principles and places a higher emphasis on zero 
waste principle. Circular economy includes 3R philosophy 
and demands industry to redesign its processes towards 
sustainability. It ensures biological nutrients entry 
into the biosphere safely and technological nutrients 
are designed to be re-circulated in the production 
system without entering the biosphere. Thus, to enable