and Conclusions
This study has focused on recent trends in CE indicators as a monitoring tool for supporting
European regional development policies. Its ﬁndings are intended to help regional policymakers to track
the progress towards CE transition in order to achieve smart and sustainable growth. The proposed
methodology for monitoring CE using the speciﬁc indicators selected within CE-related areas is
proposed as the main result of the current research. It is intended to be an additional supporting
instrument for developing a variety of monitoring actions to track the e ects of CE-based regional
development within the European context.
As this analysis has shown, existing approaches for monitoring focus greatly on Chinese CE
assumptions and priorities. Thus far, both national level actions and academic research regarding
CE-based development strategy propose assessment areas and indicators primarily relevant for the
macro and meso-levels of development in China. Existing indicators cover resource e ciency, waste
management, water, pollution and some social and economic issues, which are also important for
European countries and regions. At the same time, European and Asian priorities di er to an extent,
and European monitoring and evaluation need to focus on priorities relevant for its countries and
regions. Existing CE monitoring in Europe does not cover such crucial aspects as tracking changes in
consumption and production models, the spatial dimension inﬂuenced by CE strategies and social,
economic and cultural changes caused by reorientation toward CE-based regional development.
Nevertheless, the approaches presented in the analysed research for CE indicators’ design can be
adapted as a starting point for measuring the European dimensions of CE at national or regional levels.
CE transformation also has a strong rebound e ect as in any transformation process. In such a
situation, monitoring and tracking changes caused by CE transformation plays an important role by
oering policymakers a chance to adapt and correct strategies and actions according to information
obtained through regular evaluation. Without regular feedback about CE’s e ects, it would be
impossible to implement the best CE solutions at the regional level. CE monitoring indicators should
be tailored through strategies and action plans speciﬁc to each region. The current study proposed
general approaches for developing a set of monitoring indicators, but each region will require its
own monitoring system considering the speciﬁcs and peculiarities of local CE processes. That is why
regional authorities should start from the adaptation of existing regional development strategies or
develop new ones based on CE’s core concepts. Only after having a CE-focused strategy should a
system of CE monitoring indicators be developed.
The CE monitoring framework released by the European Commission at the end of 2017 is not
detailed enough for monitoring the e ects of important CE areas like social innovations, eco-innovations,
sharing economy initiatives, the level of greening of the main economic sectors, new business
models’ implementation, ecodesign and architecture initiatives. Yet those aspects were identiﬁed