9.1. Developmental Strategies and Socio-Environmental Impact in the Context of the Circular Economy
CE strategy is versatile enough to o er feasible potentials that o set virgin material demand
and make provision for secondary supply, raw materials, alloys (recycling), parts (remanufacturing),
and products (reuse). This CE feature is especially advantageous against supply restrictions where
new materials are not readily available. Of particular importance are the following advancements:
(a) the elimination of socio-political supply risk potentially divulged, while ensuring the supply of raw
materials, parts, and products of domestic or industrial feedstock, and (b) the optimization of closed
loop reverse supply chains. Such an approach can sustain competitive advantage to ﬁrms, enhancing
proﬁts and establishing brand reputation [52].
Another important feature of CE strategy is directed at dematerialization, which supports resource
eciency goals. This feature is feasible in various ways which involve a shift-case toward service-based
economies. This managerial modiﬁcation can be directed to service-based economies, owing to the
development of technologies which support and ensure virtual services while enhancing global access
to such technologies. It is also noteworthy that the implementation of advanced circularity principles
is challenging the transition to service-based economies. Therefore it is an unavoidable reality that
such a transition can be certainly be achieved among well-developed countries, while leaving behind
and/or shifting manufacturing among countries of less developed circularity goals [52].
Besides the aforementioned dematerialization, diversiﬁcation is also a key feature of industrial
ecology (IE) that is readily applicable to the context of CE. Speciﬁcally, diversiﬁcation can manage
network expansion, having strong potential to strive for additional circularity pathways. In this
respect, additional network nodes in the supply chain can strengthen dense connections which enable
circularity within the whole system [52].
Furthermore, these strategies are indirectly and positively a ecting the operability of ﬁrms.
The main e ect of these strategies regards the standardization of metrics in reducing supply chains
risks [ 52]. Multifaceted economic, environmental, and social valuation of customer needs could be
further materialized in terms of redesigning changes in business models and shifting from selling
products, in the context of sustainable consumption and production (SCP). Critical indicators of SCP
functionality include the time dimension (i.e., now and in the future), the utility preference, along with
existing sunk costs [14,63].
9.2. Discussion on Terminology Instruments and CE Models
It is noteworthy that during the last decade, the aforementioned concepts of BE, CE, and GE
and their relation to the goals directed at developing a sustainable economy have impacted political,
academic, social, and entrepreneurial interest. The importance of measuring circularity is linked to
measuring the e ects of the CE in terms of proﬁtability, job creation, and environmental impact. A
proposed measure can be based on the economic value of the parts of a product. Besides, considering
the environmental aspects of the analysis, a set of indicators can be designed to evaluate the e ciency
of speciﬁc processes in CE models, such as e ciency in the use of resources, waste minimization
and conversion. Future research is in alignment with di erent measures, enabling entrepreneurs to
implement cleaner production, minimizing emissions along with raising competitiveness. Moreover,
there is still room for further methodological improvements to better analyze the most appropriate