Reﬂecting on the ﬁve disposal behaviours studied in relation to the circular economy, it is
encouraging that ‘donating’ is the most favoured disposal option. We found that the preference for
donating is primarily prompted by prosocial motivations. This is very much in line with ﬁndings of
Nordlund and Garvill [ 65], Van Lange et al. [ 45], and Mitchell et al. [ 46], which all identify prosocial
values as an important predictor for individuals’ willingness to donate clothes and other valuables.
The perception of a charity appears to be important—individuals donating their textiles cared about
who would beneﬁt from their act of perceived kindness. This raises questions about whether IKEA
would be able to encourage donating within its operations, which are well-known by consumers to be
for-proﬁt, as opposed to the non-proﬁt operations of a third party. Donating was the only behaviour in
our study that did not show economic incentives to be a signiﬁcant motivator for the behaviour.
Reuse /storage was the third-most reported behaviour among study participants. Our data suggests
that this behaviour is supported by several of the motivational factors studied in this paper, including
economic reasons, environmental concerns, and convenience /time/situational factors. Our interviews
suggest that reuse /storage is not by deﬁnition a circular textile handling behaviour. In many instances,
reuse /storage only serves as a temporary solution to deal with conﬂicting feelings of wanting to get rid
of a textile while having a bad conscience about disposing of it. This can result in a stepwise process of
disposal in which reuse and storage are one stage towards getting rid of an item when an acceptable
permanent solution arises. When new products are purchased, old home textiles become redundant
and are then temporarily stored in the home. During the storage period, the owners remain open to
reusing them in another context or passing them on to a relative or friend. Jacoby et al. [ 33] support
the conclusion that one common strategy for dealing with used textiles is to temporarily store them
until a decision is made on how to dispose of them.
Our data also suggests that the type of disposal option ultimately chosen is often a result of what
is convenient at the time when storage space is needed. Depending on the circumstances, reuse /storage
in some instances only prolongs the time until discarding, rather than leading to a more circular waste
handling method. This ﬁnding is in line with other studies (e.g., Ha-Brookshire and Hodges [ 19]
regarding apparel). This suggests the importance of availability and accessibility of circular waste
handling options in textile waste handling, something that is well documented for kerbside recycling.
Research that has documented the signiﬁcance of convenience in household waste recycling [ 30] also
seems to be relevant to home textile disposal behaviour.
Less common disposal options were repairing and reselling. One possible explanation is that
consumers are unfamiliar with these options. In interviews, we found evidence for limited familiarity
with repair and resell as options when dealing with home textiles. Unlike clothes, home textiles are not
perceived as an item that can easily be sold second-hand, and repair is inhibited by the often-perceived
low value of home textiles compared to clothing. Johnson et al. [ 20] identify emotional attachment to
the textile product as a factor strongly inﬂuencing the choice of disposal method [ 34], and our research
suggests that home textiles carry low emotional attachment in general, even though there appear to be
some sub-categories—such as curtains—that can be perceived as high-value at the moment of disposal.
Discarding home textiles—representing the least circular of textile waste handling options
studied—was the second-most practiced behaviour among study participants. People who are most
likely to discard home textiles are those least a ected by social norms. This can be connected to an
observed lack of awareness about the environmental consequences of home textiles, as well as a lack of
knowledge about other behavioural options than discarding. It can be speculated that home textiles are
not perceived as being exposed to social norm scrutiny in the same way as clothes or other possessions.
Managerial and Policy Implications
From a policy perspective, interventions targeting convenience (such as education about disposal
options, or easy access to circular disposal options) are necessary to encourage the choice of one
disposal option over another, as convenience is a crucial factor in predicting participation in circular