Placing  the 2017 CE report alongside  the eco-cycle  report from 
1997 shows that two different  types of circulation  are in play in 
the documents,  reﬂecting  the changes  in environmental  politics  in 
a broader  sense. Even if an eco-modern  interpretation  of sustain-  
ability has been a feature  of global green politics  ever since the 
Rio Summit  in 1992, the new century  has highlighted  the role of 
the market  in steering  the transition  even more ( Anshelm  & Hult- 
man, 2015 ). These changes  are reﬂected  in the discursive  trans- 
formation  of circulation  in the Swedish  political  context.  The eco- 
cycle report emphasises  market  producer  responsibility  and prob- 
lematises  global inequality  while the CE report highlights  con- 
sumer responsibility  and national  competitiveness  in the global 
market.  
In line with these discursive  changes,  in this paper we have 
identiﬁed  differences  regarding  the ontology  of circularity,  in re- lation to the problem  formulation,  the proposed  solution,  respon-  
sibilities,  and in how the shape of the circle itself is imagined.  
By comparing  the eco-cycle  report and the CE report, we argue 
that the conceptualisation  of circularity  can be divided  into a weak 
and a strong version,  similar  to what have been identiﬁed  as the 
weak and strong opposing  paradigms  in the interpretation  of sus- 
tainable  development  (cf. Jacobs, 1999 ). Just as with weak and a 
strong sustainable  development,  the terms ‘strong’  and ‘weak’ do 
not relate to the success  of the implementation  but to the de- 
gree of change  required.  Such a division  of circularity  meets the 
need to distinguish  “between  ideal and subverted  CE deﬁnitions”
( Kirchherr  et al., 2017 ). 
In the eco-cycle  report, the strong version  of circulation  is por- 
trayed by a closed loop, with as little inﬂow and outﬂow  as pos- 
sible. The ﬂow in the circle should be limited  in size by stabilised  
consumption,  and geographically  by local ﬂows, similar  to the cir- 
cular vision suggested  by Boulding  (1966) . In this strong model of 
circulation,  the state takes the overall responsibility  for the transi- 
tion, while the producers  are given the practical  responsibility  for 
taking back their products  to enable circulation.  By emphasising  
environmental  and social perspectives  in the eco-cycle,  the goal of 
a strong circulation  is a fairer and more sustainable  distribution  of 
resources,  between  countries  and between  generations.  
In contrast,  we argue that the CE report can generally  be un- 
derstood  as promoting  a weak circulation  model, with open inﬂow 
from nature but closed outﬂow  to nature.  In such a weak circu- 
lation, the secondary  resources  will only complement  the extrac-  
tion of primary  resources  from the Earth’s  crust. The resources  are 
unlimited,  as the size of the circle will grow as more material  en- 
ters and is kept in the economy.  The circulated  material  should,  
just like raw material,  ﬂow around  the global market.  In the weak 
circulation  model the responsibility  for circulation  has been trans- 
ferred from the state to individuals  and entrepreneurs,  as the state 
merely  facilitates  by developing  incentives  and removing  barriers  
to the market.  The goal of a weak circulation  is more sustainable  
economic  growth,  which primarily  brings local beneﬁts  such as in- 
creased  competitiveness,  and improved  export opportunities,  inno- 
vation and jobs. 
There are also many similarities  between  the weak and the 
strong versions  of circularity,  which may be generally  true for cir- 
cularity  models  in general.  Previous  studies  have noted that circu- 
lar economy  is rooted in ecological  modernisation,  as Hobson  and 
Lynch (2016) put it; we can become  “rich and green” in  the tran- 
sition to circularity.  The connection  to ecological  modernisation  
seems to be deeply rooted in the use of the circle as a metaphor  
for material  ﬂows. Continuity,  manifested  in the perfect  shape of 
the circle, brings a promise  of an eternal  ﬂow of resources.  The cir- 
cle promises  that conditions  will continue  as usual, which in a cap- 
italist society  means continued  growth.  But this time the growth  
will be cleaner  and greener.  
The connections  to ecological  modernisation  as a political  strat- 
egy ( Hajer, 1995 ) differ between  weak and strong circularity  mod- 
els. In the eco-cycle,  representing  strong circulation,  extraction  is