In this paper, we have described an example of human–robot collaboration, where the allocation
of tasks to either a robot or a worker is decided in real time by the latter depending on the condition
of the discarded electronic device. Human operators play a leading role in the recycling process by
deciding who will perform each task. Furthermore, they concentrate on tasks requiring human skills
and ﬂexibility. The role played by collaborative robots in the process is conﬁned to that of performing
dangerous and repetitive operations for human operators. Therefore, they complement the workers’
role by making tasks safer and more productive.
A disassembly line has been described in which a close cooperation between humans and robots
has achieved a more accurate identiﬁcation of the di erent types of plastic encountered in CRTs,
alongside higher degrees of plastic separation, resulting in more environmentally friendly solutions
and an increased economic value of the recovered materials. Capital budgeting techniques have
been applied to analyze the associated investment which indicate promising results, including a
capital-back period of about nine months and an internal rate of return of 153%. Regarding the
productivity of the line, the human–robot solution o ers better results than the current manual solution
and, more importantly, it is expected that the levels of job satisfaction and commitment will be
enhanced. In this regard, it may be anticipated that operators will enjoy higher engagement values
and improve both their performance and that of the organization as a whole [ 36]. In addition to
that, by taking on more challenging tasks and performing valuable contributions, operators will
be able to enjoy work meaning and enrichment at a human level [ 37]. One of the aspects that will
change in the future work scenario would be a better trained sta alongside the presence of more
women at work. These changes have proven to have positive e ects on productivity and economic
growth [ 38]. In addition, the increasing number of elderly people at work is a reality. These facts make
the introduction of collaborative robots a key factor to improve the working conditions. This holds true
with respect to the physical point of view when the task is demanding (such as disassembly activities)
and it is performed by elderly or women workers, but also with respect to the psychological e ect
for general workers, who ask for a higher participation in taking control and making decisions over
their work.