5.1. Concrete learnings and recommendations for the focus area
Amid the scenarios assessed, we identify anaerobic digestion with
eﬀective energy and nutrient recovery as an option capable to improve
the overall sustainability of the current management system in all the
Areas-of-Protection assessed but prosperity. While common ‘circular ’
food waste management options rely on composting and anaerobicdigestion, the actual market value of compost and digestate is rather
low; in the Netherlands the market prices can be even negative, ranging
from -5 to 2 €kg
−1wet weight based on information from local op-
erators. Because of the low nutrient concentration, but high organiccarbon content, compost and digestate are often used as soil improvers
rather than fertilisers. In spite of the added value that organic matter
could possibly have for agriculture under speci ﬁc conditions, the return
on investment from applying these materials on agricultural land variessubstantially depending on local conditions ( Hijbeek et al., 2017), with
the strongest e ﬀects likely to be observed in the long-term. Therefore,
farmers may be reluctant to buy and apply compost and digestates; as a
matter of fact, they are frequently paid to do so ( Gebrezgabher et al.,
2010 ;Huygens et al., 2019 ). Considering the need to transport nutrients
from the urban to the rural system, opportunities are present to produce
nutrient-dense fertilisers with comparable agronomic properties as their
mineral alternative or to manufacture speci ﬁc niche products like bio-
char. The latter can, for instance, serve as more sustainable alternativesto existing products such as peat ( Margenot et al., 2018; Velthof, 2015 ).
Although the added value of biochar in an European agricultural con-
text remains disputed ( Jeﬀery et al., 2017 ), opportunities to apply
biochar exist in diverse areas and niche sectors ( Carlile et al., 2019).
As for all the alternative scenarios assessed, the scenario with di-
gestion and advanced post-processing of the digestate is associated withhigher costs compared to the reference (mainly based on incineration
without source-separation) because of the increased collectionexpenses. This option, however, o ﬀers advantages in most environ-
mental and social impact categories thanks to the bene ﬁts derived from
energy substitution, reduced nutrient leaching and metals deposition on
agricultural soil. The added value of the post-processing lies in the
production of a more e ﬃcient N-fertiliser next to the niche product
(biochar), both having a possible higher local demand than digestate orcompost. Under the conditions assumed for the area under study,
schemes based on home and centralised composting are associated to
more adverse impacts, especially for human health and natural re-
sources but also for prosperity in the case of centralised compositing
owing to the poor revenues and high collection costs. The centralised
mechanical-biological option performed best in fossil resource deple-
tion (Figure 4) but was a ﬀected by the impact related to enzymes
supply in the remaining impact categories and by overall high costs.Two main criticalities were observed for this scenario: ﬁrstly, sig-
niﬁcant uncertainty is connected to the consumption of enzymes and its
dataset, which calls for further investigations. Secondly, food wastesource separation should be enforced to conform with the EU Waste
Framework Directive ( European Parliament and Council, 2018 ) and the
use-on-land of food waste-derived fertilisers is typically allowed withthe pre-condition that the food waste is separated at the source
(European Parliament and Council, 2019). While this assessment in-
dicates clear priorities for the ideal management scheme, an aspectcalling for further investigation regards the portfolio of technical and
socio-economic tools to increase separate collection rates, here assumed
to be ﬁnally in line with the EU 2030 goals. This calls for a di ﬀerent
type of study, e.g. identi ﬁcation of best practices, and was beyond the
scope of this analysis.
5.2. Transforming scattered data into a useful format for stakeholders
This article presents the application of a sustainability framework
that can be used to bridge the gap between science and decision-
making. The application is illustrated with a case study on di ﬀerent
food waste management options for the Amsterdam Metropolitan Area.
This study is part of a broader EU Horizon 2020 project namely REPAiR
(Resource
Management in Peri-Urban Areas), whose ambition is to shed
new light on participatory and science-based decision-making by in-volving local stakeholders in the entire process. The method started bylisting the most relevant impacts of waste management identi ﬁed by a
wide range of stakeholders and the literature, covering social, economicand environmental areas e.g. costs, urban space consumption, sustain-
able use of natural resources, local pollution and emissions, and legis-
lative requirements. The approach applied relies on the input of the
(local) stakeholders involved in order to collect, to the best possible
Figure 4. Disaggregated life-cycle results for the Area-of-Protection natural resources (FU: 153 kt food waste annually generated). Positive values indicate burdens,
while negative indicate savings. The left-hand side of each graph illustrates the impacts for the treatment of SC-FW and NSC-FW in each scenario. The right-hand side
of each graph illustrates the total scenario result (SC-FW + NSC-FW) for the default calculation (mean and error bars indicating plus minus one standard deviation)
and for the energy and market variant when applicable. Scenarios associated with a net saving relative to REFare displayed on the green background while those
associated with a net burden relative to REFare displayed on the red background. For the abbreviations and description of the legend refer to Figure 2 .D. Tonini, et al. Resources, Conservation & Recycling 160 (2020) 104854
9