Results from the two case studies showed that both sanitation ventures faced similar challenges
to realizing the circular economy and that there were also similarities in the government and policy
contexts between Haiti and Kenya. The fact that both ventures were able to sell all the fertilizer they
produce showed that there is a demand for organic amendments, but a larger market needs to be
accessed to reach proﬁtability. In treating human excreta and producing compost, the treatment can
become more proﬁtable at larger scales [ 29], both companies were still increasing the number of toilet
customers and were hoping to reach an economy of scale and be proﬁtable once a certain density of
coverage is reached and compost volumes increased.
4.1. Challenges to Proﬁtability
A considerable amount of resources are currently needed to sell compost derived from human
excreta because of its relative novelty as a commercial product. The quality of the compost and its
positive e ect on crops need to be demonstrated through trials to attract customers and a dedicated
team of agronomists providing support and advise to farmers is one of the elements required. It is
likely that these e orts will only be needed at the beginning of the commercialization process to secure
initial customers, as other farmers will see the beneﬁts of the compost in the early-adopters. However
they represent a signiﬁcant investment and e ort for a young company. In addition to that initial
challenge to breaking even, compost is also a low-value product. In both case studies, it was evident
that the demand for human excreta derived fertilizer existed, but the challenge lay in recovering
treatment costs and making a proﬁt from sales. The production of fertilizers derived from organic
residues in the formal sector is generally uncommon and that type of fertilizer is often stigmatized
because it originates from materials that are considered as waste. Compost is also bulkier than chemical
fertilizers, so transport costs can be signiﬁcant relative to its value, and it is often perceived as less
convenient to use than pelletized chemical fertilizers [ 14,15,29]. Modifying the properties of the ﬁnal
product can also have signiﬁcant e ects on its proﬁtability. Danso et al [30] showed the potential e ect
of modifying compost attributes in Uganda: farmers’ willingness to pay was US$0.40 more if the
fertilizer was certiﬁed, which gave an overall price 67 times higher than the cost of providing it. If the
compost was pelletized, they would be willing to pay $0.127 more, but this meant the sale price was
less than the price required to produce the compost. The high concentration of pathogens in the initial
material required extensive monitoring and testing to ensure health risks are eliminated, also adding
to the operational cost of the composting plants. Full cost recovery of biosolids production is also a
challenge for wastewater treatment companies. In the Unites States for instance, a survey of a range of
companies selling biosolids compost, showed that on average one third of operation and maintenance
costs of the composting facility were covered by compost sales [31].
Compost also faced barriers in the fertilizer market, with markets for organic fertilizers not being
developed. There is a need to ‘level the playing ﬁeld’ to create viable competition for organic fertilizers
in the wider fertilizer market; incentives for using organic fertilizers need to be provided. Currently
many countries in the Global South provide subsidies to facilitate farmers’ access to mineral fertilizers
but fewer incentives are in place for the use of organic fertilizers [ 32]. The successful production
and sales of compost from organic residues is not impossible. A well-known example of successful
production of compost from organic residues from markets is Waste Concern in Bangladesh [ 33].
As Seelos and Mair [ 34] explain for this case, a partnership with a chemical fertilizer company allowed
the compost manufacturer to sell all its produce at a proﬁt whilst the mineral fertilizer company
processed it further. This was also helped by local government’s e orts in promoting organic agriculture
among local farmers. Support from the Bangladeshi Ministry of Agriculture was instrumental to the
success of this initiative by providing formal approvals and supporting policies for the compost [ 15,35].
Neither of the treatment systems considered in this study collect or treat the urine fraction of
excreta even though it contains the highest concentration of nutrients [ 36]. This was mainly due to
prohibitive transport costs to the processing sites which are a long way away from where the urine is