– closing the  
loop 
The foregoing suggests that, since their  
introduction, waste management practices in  
England have gone from strength to strength.  Currently, however, we are at an important  
crossroads and how we navigate waste  
management practices will have an effect in the  
decades to come. In 2015, the EU launched an  
action plan for the circular economy, Closing the  
Loop (EC, 2015). Although it mentions recycling  
targets for 2035 (see Figure 3), more importantly  
the action plan points to reframing of waste as an  
‘end-user’ problem. Closing the Loop  brings to the  
fore the notion of the ‘circular economy’ in which  
waste need not exist: it is ‘designed out’ (Ellen  
MacArthur Foundation, 2013). In other words,  
products are designed with a view to how they  
would be taken apart after their functional life and  
the components re-used. An example would be to  
establish leases for household products in a way  
that would benefit both the manufacturer and the  
consumer. With washing machines, for instance,  
manufacturers could profit from having many of the  
working parts returned to them at the end of the  
lease, and the consumer could save money per  
wash during the period of lease.  
 
An emphasis on the ‘circular economy’ could shift  
the focus from ‘sustainable consumption’ to  
‘sustainable production’. This may result in a re-
scaling of waste management roles and  
responsibilities from individuals and local  
authorities to local and international businesses.  
This has implications for the future role of local  
authorities as waste collection and waste disposal  
authorities. Currently, local authorities have a  
central role in implementing sustainable  
development, including the UN’s Sustainable  
Development Goals (SDGs), including by setting  
out targets for recycling, separating household  
collections into compostable and recyclable  
materials and raising awareness of and promoting  
recycling in their area (WRAP , 2007; Cole et al., 
2014). Interventions such as adopting ‘better  
waste management practices’ are seen as  
necessary to link up effectively with global level  
efforts to achieve ‘sustainable development’ (see  
World Commission on Environment and  
Development, 1987). When viewed together, the  
‘self-sufficiency’ and ‘proximity’ principles above  
pose a complex dilemma for waste management  
practices, especially for the commercial and  
industrial sector, because it is difficult to draw  
‘rigid’ boundaries around the flow of waste  
materials within a country. The impact of the  
circular economy on the definition of waste also  
has important implications for the household  
waste sector, as follows:  
•In ‘designing out’ waste when do we deem a  
substance or object as ‘waste’?  
•Taking into account the range of recovery  
options available to convert ‘waste’ to ‘non-   
Waste  
management in  
England and   
the ‘circular  
economy’  
model