s 
5.1. Deterioration analysis 
Improvements in understanding the stages of deterioration allow 
retailers to classify F&V into the perfect, intermediate, imperfect, and 
disposable categories. 
The analyses of these findings – considering the technological ad-
vances – suggest that deterioration within supermarkets could be iden-
tified using cameras mounted on ceilings or shelves, as well as by odour 
sensors (IoT). Accordingly, sensors (or other similar devices) should be 
developed/adapted to capture the image/odour of each type of F&V and 
its variation throughout the day. Such technological advances 
contribute to the establishment of support systems that guide and 
monitor practices ’ transformations into sustainable, suitable, and low 
pollution (Khan et al., 2020 ; Song et al., 2019 ). 
The information gathered should be stored in a database (thus 
generating a Big Data). AI and ML could then use this information to 
predict F&V’s remaining time before a transformation to the next 
deterioration stage. This study contributes to the field by indicating how 
these new technologies could enhance environmental sustainability 
(Arunraj and Ahrens, 2015 ; Dubey et al., 2016 ; Jagtap and Rahimifard, 
2019 ; Manita et al., 2020 ) or support decision-making (Fosso Wamba 
et al., 2015 ; Jagtap and Rahimifard, 2019 ; Manita et al., 2020 ). Since 
F&V degradation is a common problem for all retailers, supermarket 
managers could develop joint actions with their competitors. These ac-
tions could begin with a series of presentations to large supermarkets in 
which the issue is identified and explained, and start-ups could be 
informed of the problem in order for them to develop the appropriate 
technology. We would therefore suggest that future studies on 
large-scale group decision-making in uncertain environments could also 
focus on the suppliers of technology (Tirkolaee et al., 2020 ), as well as 
how to promote sustainable value innovation in the supply chain 
(Shakeel et al., 2020 ). 
5.2. Prices 
Understanding the stages of deterioration opens space for super -
markets ’ price policies to be reviewed, especially since some customers 
are willing to buy items that are not at the perfect stage (Coderoni and 
Perito, 2020 ; de Hooge et al., 2017 ; McCarthy et al., 2020 ). Attractive 
pricing creates options for furthering corporate sustainability (Tollin 
and Christensen, 2019 ), enhancing an organisations ’ bottom line, and 
can positively affect consumer (and societal) well-being (Hofenk et al., 
2019 ; Painter-Morland et al., 2017 ; Schaltegger and Horisch, 2017 ). The 
different price options between F&V items will encourage customers to 
choose intermediate items voluntarily. This finding contributes to the 
literature by indicating that differentiated pricing for F&V at the perfect 
and intermediate stages successfully focuses on consumers ’ positive 
traits, thereby encouraging their sustainable consumption and effective 
purchasing choices (McCarthy et al., 2020 ; Song and Kim, 2018 ; Luchs 
and Kumar, 2017 ; Panzone et al., 2016 ; Ross and Milne, 2020 ). 
The findings also indicate that waste mitigation could be improved 
through dynamic, deterioration-based pricing based. Alternatives to 
such management include dynamic pricing based on item traceability 
(Zhu, 2017 ) and analysis at the point of sale (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 
2020 ). M. de Souza et al.