With the correct strategy and the participatio n of the stakeholders—namely, the government, 
manufacturers, distributors, and consumers—this research demonstrates that it is possible to move 
toward CE in the EEE industry. Major regulatory changes might not even be required. For example, the national survey showed that recycling of EEE products could potentially be increased by 
establishing collection schemes to pick up devices from homes or offices (32%) and by increasing the number of equipment collection centers to drop of f devices (23%). Over half of the interviewees 
answered that they would agree with these options.  In fact, several superm arket chains in Mexico 
already have containers to collect cans, paperboa rd, paper, and plastics in their establishments. 
Anderson [59] and Kumar et al. [5] determined that , in the US, consumers have a better tendency to 
deliver their e-waste to the recycler, due to the ex istence of delivery channe ls, or the manufacturer 
will collect them from their homes/offices. 
Nevertheless, with this possibility, the survey showed a lack of awareness and mistrust by the 
consumer to deliver their products to collection centers (69%). This suggests that an incentive scheme, such as a reverse logistics model, is necessary, through which consumers co uld return equipment to 
producers and/or distributors, 54% of the respondents agreed to leave a deposit scheme if it is less 
than 10% of the electronic final price. This might not be easy, but international experience in Brazil, the Netherlands, Japan, and Australia demonstrates that it is possible [18,19,38,46–48]. It would be helpful to develop environmental education and aw areness campaigns. An incentive scheme should 
include economic benefits for the actors in the circular chain as well as sanctions and/or penalties that promote the responsible usage, dispos al, recycling, and reuse of WEEE.  
This research demonstrates that there is a wide opportunity to increase circularity in the 
industry, particularly in the case of mobile phones, if ways to extend usage are developed. This 
requires a better understanding of co nsumer behavior according to each type of electronic equipment. 
For example, unlike other electronic products—suc h as televisions, desktops, laptops, and tablets—
mobile phone consumers use their devices for only a short time before disposing of them. Almost 
80% of the interviewees used their cell phones for between one and three years. In fact, 40% used 
them for less than one year. Hennies and Stamminger [60] showed that the amount of obsolete equipment is driven by re latively short replacement cycles. Sinc e technologies change rapidly, many 
users in Europe exchange their devices regularly and more frequently before they actually break [61]. 
This could have different explanations. On one hand, there are extensive programs by mobile 
phone companies that incentivize users to change plans in less than one year. Authorities do not 
regulate the marketing and advertising campai gns of distributors, exposing consumers to 
Figure 6. Options to keep mobile phones longer than expected (percentages). Source: Own elaboration
based on the results obtained from the national survey (2018).
5. Discussion
With the correct strategy and the participation of the stakeholders—namely, the government,
manufacturers, distributors, and consumers—this research demonstrates that it is possible to move
toward CE in the EEE industry. Major regulatory changes might not even be required. For example,
the national survey showed that recycling of EEE products could potentially be increased by establishing
collection schemes to pick up devices from homes or o ces (32%) and by increasing the number of
equipment collection centers to drop o devices (23%). Over half of the interviewees answered that
they would agree with these options. In fact, several supermarket chains in Mexico already have
containers to collect cans, paperboard, paper, and plastics in their establishments. Anderson [ 59] and
Kumar et al. [ 5] determined that, in the US, consumers have a better tendency to deliver their e-waste
to the recycler, due to the existence of delivery channels, or the manufacturer will collect them from
their homes /oces.
Nevertheless, with this possibility, the survey showed a lack of awareness and mistrust by the
consumer to deliver their products to collection centers (69%). This suggests that an incentive scheme,
such as a reverse logistics model, is necessary, through which consumers could return equipment to
producers and /or distributors, 54% of the respondents agreed to leave a deposit scheme if it is less
than 10% of the electronic ﬁnal price. This might not be easy, but international experience in Brazil,
the Netherlands, Japan, and Australia demonstrates that it is possible [ 18,19,38,46–48]. It would be
helpful to develop environmental education and awareness campaigns. An incentive scheme should
include economic beneﬁts for the actors in the circular chain as well as sanctions and /or penalties that
promote the responsible usage, disposal, recycling, and reuse of WEEE.
This research demonstrates that there is a wide opportunity to increase circularity in the industry,
particularly in the case of mobile phones, if ways to extend usage are developed. This requires a better
understanding of consumer behavior according to each type of electronic equipment. For example,
unlike other electronic products—such as televisions, desktops, laptops, and tablets—mobile phone
consumers use their devices for only a short time before disposing of them. Almost 80% of the
interviewees used their cell phones for between one and three years. In fact, 40% used them for
less than one year. Hennies and Stamminger [ 60] showed that the amount of obsolete equipment is
driven by relatively short replacement cycles. Since technologies change rapidly, many users in Europe
exchange their devices regularly and more frequently before they actually break [61].