The paper presents design knowledge for a digital artifact that im-
proves household waste sorting and promotes urban CE. Using a DSR 
approach, we defined the DOs of the artifact and proposed more specific 
DPs. We prototypically instantiated the in Frankfurt am Main and 
evaluated the artifact’s effectiveness, efficiency, and impact. 
7.1. Implications for research and theory 
The work contributes to research in three areas: 1) by providing 
nascent design theory and instantiating a prototype, 2) by contextual -
izing the TPB in the area of IS changing waste sorting behavior, and 3) 
by extending the sparse IS literature in the domain of CE. 
First, we provide DPs as nascent design theory and a prototypical 
instantiation based on the design knowledge and propose expansions for 
further development of instantiations of the artifact. Gregor and Hevner 
(2013) distinguish between three types of DSR artifacts contributions: 
Level 1 contributions cover specific instantiations such as products and 
processes. More abstract level 2 contributions aim at nascent design 
theories such as DPs, constructs, or methods. The most abstract and 
mature level 3 contributions refer to well-developed design theories. 
Our research contributes to the first two levels. We first develop nascent 
design theory (level 2) in the form of DOs, related DPs, and specific 
design guidelines. The evaluation of this design knowledge by way of a 
prototypical instantiation equals a level 1 contribution. 
Second, our DPs are theoretically backed, and we contextualize the 
TPB within the domain of waste sorting. By identifying antecedents for 
the elements of the TPB, we show how IS can improve individual waste 
sorting behavior. Current research mainly focuses on which element of 
the TPB is most influential regarding waste sorting or extends the TPB 
through additional elements (e.g., Ma et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021). 
We follow Zhang et al. (2015), who state that more attention must be 
given to identifying factors influencing the TPB elements regarding 
waste sorting behavior. Building on this, we identify and theorize the 
relationship between our DPs as influential antecedents and the ele-
ments of the TBP. 
Third, we contribute to IS literature within the domain of CE. We 
show how IS can leverage its potential to enable individual awareness, 
empowerment, and responsibility and shift individual behavior towards 
CE. By spreading the artifact through the local waste management 
company, a shift of cities or beyond can be induced in the future. In 
doing so, we contribute to the research objectives of Zeiss et al. (2021) 
by addressing and extending enacting circular material flows with IS. 
7.2. Practical implications 
This work makes a significant contribution to practitioners such as 
waste management companies, communal enterprises, and cities in two 
ways: 1) By addressing a real-world problem of communal enterprises, 
and 2) by promoting the urban transition towards CE. 
First, our artifact addresses the need for waste management com-
panies to identify ways to improve household waste sorting, especially 
for biowaste. In this vein, our design knowledge was informed by the 
practitioner’s insights and expectations. Further, existing digital solutions proposed by prior research are at an early conceptual stage. In 
this regard, our work extends and improves the recent contributions (e. 
g., Bonino et al., 2016; Rasmussen et al., 2020) by presenting design 
knowledge and building upon existing behavioral theories. By coun-
tering the high amount of currently wrong-sorted waste, our artifact 
provides the potential to leverage economic benefits for the waste 
management company and environmental benefits for the cities. We 
instantiate our prototype in a real-world setting in the German city of 
Frankfurt am Main. By showing the procedure, describing our imple -
mentation in detail, and providing information about possible expan -
sions, our work can guide further improved real-world piloting or field 
studies. In this regard, we improve the knowledge about IS-based solu-
tions for changing waste sorting behavior and the current early-stage 
solutions. 
Second, our research assists the transition toward a CE in cities. By 
improving the waste sorting and the separate collection of biowaste, our 
work provides a step towards more CE in cities and a functioning local 
biological cycle by presenting the example of the German city of 
Frankfurt am Main. As the biogas and the compost, both generated from 
the city’s biowaste, are locally used for the city’s energy supply, land-
scaping, and local food production, the city creates its own biological 
cycle on the macro level. Moreover, fostering citizens’ understanding of 
this local cycle can improve their engagement in biowaste sorting and 
CE on the micro-level. Finally, in times of climate and energy crisis and 
war, every additional self-sufficient source of gas increases the security 
of supply. 
7.3. Limitations and future research 
This work has limitations. First, we build our design knowledge upon 
a literature review and interviews. Including more research from more 
disciplines and interviewing additional experts or potential users might 
alter our results. In this vein, we developed the design knowledge, and 
the prototype, especially for the pilot district in Frankfurt am Main, 
which limits the generalizability of the results. Future research could 
develop more abstract and mature design knowledge as a level 3 
contribution. Second, due to temporal and technical constraints, we 
could not implement all aspects our interviewees wished for or the 
literature recommends. Thus, we propose that future research could 
expand and improve the artifact as outlined in section 6.2 above. Third, 
our field study with the prototypical instantiation is limited by the 
number of participants, their potential self-selection bias, and any bias 
potentially caused by the social attention to this topic. Furthermore, 
technical restrictions and the short run time limit the results of our 
instantiation. The piloting would have to run over several months or 
even years to gauge any long-term impacts. Future research should build 
on our work to understand how factors such as convenience influence 
sustainable behavior change. Fourth, due to the practical constraints 
that resulted from evaluating our artifact based on a pilot study in the 
field, our current observations and data analysis are limited to a quali -
tative approach. Thus, we propose that future research complements our 
work with a large-scale and long-term study that facilitates a quantita -
tive assessment of behavior changes. 
8.Conclusion 
CE is one promising strategy to aid urban stakeholders in times of the 
climate and energy crisis and growing waste volumes. Biowaste has the 
potential to be transformed into biogas as an additional source of 
renewable energy, but only if the waste sorting quality is right. So ac-
tivities to improve waste sorting quality must start where the waste is 
susceptible: Urban households. By using IS as a tool to foster behavior 
change, we investigate how to design an artifact that promotes house -
hold biowaste sorting and urban CE. In line with this design knowledge, 
we developed a prototype, instantiated it in the German city of Frankfurt 
am Main, and evaluated its effectiveness, efficiency, and impact. Based C. Crome et al.