3.1. Waste-Based Fertilizers in the European Strategic Documents
In 2014, the ﬁrst ofﬁcial document on the CE implementation was presented by the
EC, entitled “Towards a circular economy: A zero waste programme for Europe”, related
to the CE [ 12]. It clearly indicated the importance of sustainable waste management as the
key area of the CE implementation in the EU. The tackling of speciﬁc waste challenges
related to an uncontrolled loss of resources or environmental impacts was announced. The
special area of interest was dedicated to the recycling of critical raw materials (CRMs),
including phosphorus (P), which is vital resource for food production and a key component
in fertilizers. The P raw materials included on the CRMs list are phosphate rock and
white P [ 17–19]. The importance of P raw materials deserves particular attention, as their
production worldwide is concentrated in few non-European countries, such as in Morocco,
China, the United States, Kazakhstan, and Vietnam, and from the EU’s perspective, most of
the listed countries are considered as a political risk. The structure of the global producers
and main EU sourcing countries of phosphorus and phosphate rock is presented in Figure 2.
The import reliance for phosphate rock is 84% and phosphorus 100%, while the End of Life
Recycling Input Rate (percentage of overall demand that can be satisﬁed through secondary
raw materials) for phosphate rock is 17% and phosphorus 0%. At the European level, P
resources have low substitutability and low recycling rates [ 20], which is a consequence
of inappropriate P management, causing P losses at every stage of its lifecycle [ 21]. As
P raw materials are a base of fertilizer production [ 22], the EC underlined the necessity
to develop a policy framework on P to enhance its recycling, foster innovation, improve
internal market conditions and make its sustainable use mainstream in EU legislation on
fertilizers, water, food and waste [12,23].
In 2015, a second ofﬁcial document on CE was published, entitled “Closing the loop-
An EU action plan for the Circular Economy” [ 24]. It showed the ﬁrst CE Action Plan for
the EU, in which the legislative proposals on waste showed long-term targets to reduce
landﬁlling waste, including nutrient-rich waste [ 25], and to increase preparation for the
recycling of key waste streams, such as municipal waste. As one of the main barriers in the
usage of waste-based fertilizers in the EU, differences across the Member States in rules as
well as quality and environmental standards were indicated. It was assumed that indicated
targets and planned activities should lead the European countries to gradually converge
on best practice levels and accelerate the requisite investment in sustainable and circular
waste management. The EC also stated that the revision of the European regulations on
fertilizers shall be conducted in the coming years. An important statement of the EC was
also to list the recycled nutrients (used as fertilizers) as a distinct category of secondary
raw materials, which require the development of their quality standards [24].
The ﬁrst implementing act of the CE Action Plan was “Proposal laying down rules
on the making available on the market of CE marked fertilizing products”, published
in 2016 [ 26]. The innovative fertilizing products, including waste-based fertilizers, were
clearly indicated as products which are in line with the CE model [ 27]. However, they have
difﬁculties accessing the internal market as a consequence of the diversity of national rules
and standards on fertilizers and fertilization. The inclusion of the waste-based fertilizers in
the Fertilizer Regulation was challenging because of the relatively variable composition
and characteristics of such materials. Therefore, the ex-post evaluations, stakeholder
consultations and impact assessments were conducted before the ﬁnal revision of the
Fertilizer Regulation was published in 2019 [28].