and conclusions 
Policies on waste and the CE are often featured tog ether as aiming towards the same goal of 
achieving more sustainability. In reality, underlyi ng policy tensions and diverging objectives 
make for a disorderly and inadequate response to th e challenges humanity face if to ensure 
safe and just living conditions in the long-term. I t is certainly true that well-designed waste 
legislation could contribute to the objectives of a  sustainable CE; notably by limiting 
environmental impacts of products through environme ntal sound waste management and the 
creation of markets for secondary raw materials; an d by reducing social impacts linked with 
waste dumping on lower income countries. However, E U waste law remains entangled in the 
conflicting approaches of preventing waste at sourc e or at the point of impact, with the 
balance consistently titling in favour of the latte r.   
This imbalance may be explained from an historical perspective as EU waste law has 
developed at a different time and in a different co ntext than the CE. Waste avoidance and 
product lifetime extension are relatively new prior ities. The initial aim of the legislator and 
the CJEU was to regulate waste for the purpose of a voiding pollution from waste dumping, 
landfilling and other improper waste treatment that  constituted the most significant threat in 
the 1970s. This led notably to a broad definition o f waste that encompasses anything that is 
required or intended to be discarded, leaving littl e to no space to the development of 
secondary markets for products. In addition, the in clusion of waste prevention as a priority of 
EU waste law led to the appropriation of a theme th at would arguably have been best 
regulated from a product perspective.  
In addition, as waste management became a competiti ve market, waste law was increasingly 
expected to enable market actors to make profit fro m material recovery and recycling. The 
influence of a certain conception of environmental policymaking that dominated throughout 
the 1990s and 2000s and that is based on economic i ncentives is undeniably strong in waste 
legislation. Hence, one of the flagship concepts of  EU waste law, namely EPR, is a result of 
the predominance of market-based instruments in pol icymaking. The view that economic 
incentives would necessarily trigger upstream chang es, in particular in product design, did not 
materialize in practice.  
Journal Pre-proof