Whilst all of the cases exhibited novel approaches to the CE for san-
itation and potential pathways to achieve it, there are dif ﬁculties with all
of them. Despite varying business models, ﬁnancial viability was not
achieved, and issues with collection of waste, marketing and acceptance
of products were found. This contrasts with other quantitative studies
that have often given projected a much larger ﬁnancial contribution of
re-use in sanitation ( Diener et al., 2014 ;Ddiba, 2016 ). Overall, from
the case studies, a series of social and technical changes and transforma-
tions are needed to enhance CE for sanitation, which we map here onto
the socio-technical change model, as shown in Table 4 and explained
below. The framework distinguishes between changes across four do-
mains with corresponding, indicative time spans: 1) operational and
management issues include aspects that can continuously be changed,
such as a regulator changing prices or a shift in the way infrastructure
is run; 2) governance level changes happen at medium timescale of 1
to 10 years and include aspects such as decisions to develop new infra-
structure or amendments in contracting procedures; 3) changes in the
institutional environmental tend to take decades to be realised and in-
clude shifts in established policy trajectories or technical design stan-
dards taught in engineering schools; 4) and, ﬁnally, at the longest
timeframe changes in embedded and structural domains may take cen-
turies to be realised, and include aspects such as changes in social norms
or transformative shifts in technology. A key idea is that changes in each
domain, whether intentional or emergent, cascade upward and down-
wards to in ﬂuence each other in what can be unpredictable ways
(Williamson, 2000 ;Bauer and Herder, 2009 ). One signi ﬁcant implica-
tion is that large scale socio-technical systems cannot simply be
redesigned in a controlled manner, even by national governments, as
many processes of change will have deep seated trajectories beyond
any reasonable planning framework. We therefore adopt this thinking
to help us unpack the multi-dimensional and often unplannable changesthat need to occur for large-scale socio-technical transformation to
occur and assess our results in that context.
4.1. Operation and management
The current set of incentives lead to day-to-day decisions that affect
the success of CE for sanitation. A lot of these issues can be subject to
quick changes, such as adjusting disposal fees. The intersecting eco-
nomic incentives of ﬁnes, tipping fees and transport costs do not lead
to a suf ﬁcient incentive for central collection in cities and instead
waste is disposed elsewhere. This issue of illegal disposal has been
seen across different cities in the developing world ( Holm et al.,
2015a ;Peal et al., 2015 ). From a CE point of view, illegal disposal causes
systems to operate under capacity, meaning that the economics of re-
source recovery are not suf ﬁcient to drive repairs or improvements of
the system. Policies and adjustments to fees and subsidies that account
for this trade-off could lead to an increased centralised collection and
raise the potential of CE for sanitation. Another major issue in the tech-
nical subsystem is the quality of waste that can be collected, that is how
much segregation there is between organic and plastic waste. The adap-
tation of Nashik treatment plant to take food waste from hotels instead
of municipal solid waste is an example of a short-term operational
change that can be taken to solve this issue, but the impact of this is
not clear yet.
4.2. Governance
There are institutional choices that affect the operations of CE sys-
tems but would require longer term decisions and planning. The process
of designing, contracting and siting treatment systems combines both
social and technical factors and has a large in ﬂuence on the operational
issues of the intersecting incentives of transport and disposal costs. As a
technical shift to the system, there is also the increasing generation of
sludge that comes from the rapid expansion of sanitation access thatTable 3
Economics of case studies.
Case Capital
costs ($)Operating costs of
compost production($ per tonne)Sale price
($ pertonne)Money saved on
electricitygeneration ($/year)
Devanahalli 120,000 Unable to obtain 93 n/a
Dharwad ~0 ~0 13 n/a
Hyderabad 13 Million 42 –48 42 –47 72,300
Nashik 1.12 Million Unable to obtain 33 –42 54,000
Puducherry 18,800 60.82 79 –105 n/aTable 4
Framework of barriers to Circular Economy Sanitation (adapted from Bauer and Herder,
2009 ;Williamson, 2000 ).
Domains and time scale
(indicative)Social subsystem Technical subsystem
Operation and
management
Continuous
adjustments•Disposal fees and ﬁnes
•Transport cost for
emptiers•Amount of waste gener-
ated and collected
•Level of segregation of
waste streams
•Fertiliser demand
GovernanceChanges over years,design of ef ﬁcient
governance regime•Enforcement of ﬁnes
•Contract process for
implementing FSTPs
•Integration of waste
management
•Knowledge/Education
about sustainableproducts•Design and siting of treat-
ment systems
•Certiﬁcation and integra-
tion of CE products intosubsidy scheme
•Policies promoting large
adoption of sanitationtechnology creating newwaste source
Institutional
environment
Changes over decades,design of overall
institutional setting•Jurisdiction of who is
rural vs urban
•Energy and agricul-
ture policy
•Streamlining of plan-
ning process
•Emphasis on addi-
tional systemcomplexity•Standards and emphasis
on sewers or non-seweredsanitation
•Pragmatism vs high stan-
dards
•Climate change
•Agricultural productivity/-
Soil health
•Modularity of technology
•Rural-urban migration
•Demographic shifts
Embeddedness
Changes over centuries,often non-calculative oreven spontaneous•Perception of FS Use
•Caste system
•Transformation of
political systems•Technology Innovation
and Large-Scale Change8 A. Mallory et al. / Science of the Total Environment 744 (2020) 140871