The results and ﬁndings presented in this article provide in-
sights from three different types of representative stakeholders: a
technology provider, a technology user, and a governmental
agency, which oversees environmental protection and wastemanagement. On this basis, the authors of this article proposed
several propositions: The ﬁrst was that the lack of pressures from
external stakeholders, including the regulatory bodies and the
markets (B2 and B5), was at that time a fundamental barrier and a
reason for the failure in the promotion of smart enabling technol-
ogies for improving waste management. The second was that the
lack of internal motivation, which was attributed to the lack of
environmental education and culture of environmental protection
(B7), was another fundamental barrier. The third was that the lack
of knowledge of smart waste management (B1) was a barrier as the
markets are still at a nascent stage. The fourth was that the cost and
ﬁnancial challenges (B6) associated with implementing smart
waste management solutions were important factors. Last but not
least, technical dif ﬁculties associated with smart waste manage-
ment (B4) were considered a prominent barrier by the potential
and actual technology users, but not by the providers. Based on
these general propositions, the authors of this research derived
practical and theoretical implications, which are presented in the
following two subsections.
5.1. Practical implications
The key causal barriers, B2 (Lack of regulatory pressures), B5
(Lack of market pressures and demands), and B7 (Lack of envi-ronmental education and culture of environmental protection), are
of fundamental importance, as they will affect the system over the
long-term. In order to overcome these three barriers, it is essential
for the Chinese government to take an approach of active
involvement. The Chinese National Development and Reform
Commission (NDRC) was charged with the responsibility of pro-
moting CE. It should intensify its regulatory pressures, since CE has
already been legislated in China in 2008. Over the past decade,
China has made some progress in incorporating environmental
education into its national educational curricula. However, a cul-
tural transformation often takes several decades. Therefore, the
Fig. 4. DEMATEL cause-effect diagram visually categorizes barriers from the governmental agency's perspective.A. Zhang et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 240 (2019) 118198 9