: Interpreting the circular economy debate in
Sweden
We have analysed the CE debate in Swedish press material be-
tween the years 2012 and 2019 with a focus on opinion pieces by
company representatives, public authorities, political parties, and
environmentally minded opinion makers. Despite the recent his-
tory of local environmental con ﬂicts in Sweden, in the national
debate the idea of CE was (almost without exception) uncritically
incorporated in a pre-existing narrative in which global marketcompetitiveness could be prioritized, perfectly balancing within
planetary ecological boundaries ( Anshelm, 2012 ).
Within this narrative, the CE concept promised to erase the need
for con ﬂicts between economic demands and ecological consider-
ations. Key Swedish actors have converged on this common
narrative from different directions. Green Party representatives
increasingly acknowledged that large corporations, and not just
small business, had to play an important positive role in the
response to climate change. In turn, large companies adapted to a
certain extent to the Green Party ’s views on resource use and the
role of environmental legislation in securing conditions for pro-
duction. Extractive and resource-consuming businesses alike sup-
ported increased circularity.
Social Democrats supported the idea of more circularity through
commissioning a CE investigation. And they generally endorsed
aiming to increase eco-ef ﬁciency and circularity in the existing
economic system, as advocated by environmentally minded
opinion makers and large business interests. Liberal and conser-
vative parliamentarians underlined individual freedoms in the CE
debate, which set them apart from business interests. But overall
the CE debate was, and is, characterised by a notable convergence
around the idea that the implementation of a CE could proceed
without political disputation.
The CE narratives in Sweden broadly re ﬂect the historic evolu-
tion from waste management to resource management identi ﬁed
byRieke et al. (2018) , and the themes of idealized circularity, new
roles for consumers, economic growth, and renewal though
competitiveness identi ﬁed at the European level by Lazarevic and
Valve (2017) .
Thus, the local con ﬂicts over natural resources raging in Sweden
at the same time appear to have had no direct impact on the CE
debate. Rather these debates are running parallel, as to a large
degree the same political parties, the same companies, the same
industry organizations, and the same environmental organizations,
which are opposed in local con ﬂicts, are in full agreement on the
implementation of a CE. This disconnect between CE politics and
natural resource politics in Sweden is all the more striking becauseSweden is ein contrast with the EU as a whole ea net resource
exporter. This all begs the question: how can we explain that the
debate on CE in Sweden is seemingly so depoliticized?
6. Conclusion: Circularity, ambiguity and resilient capital
We have highlighted several ways in which the ambiguity of theJ. Niskanen et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 261 (2020) 121117 6