Fruit and vegetable leftovers, which are usually discarded from wholesale markets, represent
a cheap substrate available in huge quantities that can be used to rear insects and obtain insect meal to
be included in feed formulation. According to the results shown in Table 1, H. illucens larvae can grow
on this waste material and transform it quite completely, therefore, this insect can be advantageously
employed to reduce food loss in this market sector. The comparison of laboratory and mass rearing
tests (Figures 1 and 2) demonstrated that it is possible to rear BSF larvae on a large scale on this
substrate and that they actually thrive when are in crowded conditions because they are gregarious
insects. The inﬂuence of rearing density on insect performances, food consumption, and digestibility
is well-known. Norris [ 41] found that the Approximate Digestibility index was higher in crowded
Schistocerca gregaria adults than in isolated individuals; Hyphantria cunea larvae reared individually or
in small groups grew somewhat more slowly than larvae reared in large groups [ 42]; Long [ 43] assessed
that crowded Plusia gamma completed their larval stage quicker than isolated individuals. However,
the underlying mechanism of the better growth of crowded BSF larvae might also be related to the
regulation exerted by temperature on larval intestinal enzymes. In fact, according to Bonelli et al. [ 13]
the optimum temperature for proteolytic activity in the midgut of BSF larvae is 45C. This temperature
can be generated by larval overcrowding and heat produced by their movement [ 44]. As this feature
strongly contributes to the e ciency of feeding substrate bioconversion by BSF larvae, a suboptimal
density, such as that occurring under laboratory conditions, can impair the digestion processes in BSF
larvae and result in a delayed growth compared to mass rearing. Notwithstanding we proved that
BSF were able to transform the fruit and vegetable mix, there are many hints that the substrate is of
primary importance for insect development in terms of larval cycle length, larval size and weight,
and larval nutritional composition [ 11,45–48]. Therefore, in addition to analysing growth performances
of larvae on di erent feeding substrates (VMD compared to SD), we focused on some physiological
markers associated with the di erent feeding conditions. Even though our data demonstrated that
VMD is suitable for rearing BSF larvae, a lower developmental rate was observed compared to SD.
The lower nutritional content of VMD must be considered among the factors that can contribute to this
dierence. Nevertheless, the larvae are able to exploit this substrate thanks to some physiological and
morphological modiﬁcation of their midgut [ 33], in particular the length of microvilli present in the
apical membrane of cells in the posterior region of the midgut (Figure 3A,B). This region is speciﬁcally
involved in nutrient absorption [ 13] and the increase in the length of microvilli can ensure a higher
absorbing surface to maximize the intake of nutrient even when the diet has a low nutritional content.
Although BSF demonstrates the capacity to adapt to the food substrate to some extent, it is important
to assess the long-term e ect of the use of this diet on insect growth. Deﬁciencies of some nutrients
might accumulate across generations and epigenetic e ects can also become detrimental after a few
reproduction cycles. In this case, a possible solution to the problem might be to preserve a genetic
stock for egg reproduction through rearing on SD and to use the VMD diet only to produce insect
biomass for commercial purposes.