The total subjective weights for the indicators is depicted in Figure 3, in which it can be seen
that the environmental indicators have resulted as of the least concern. Previous ﬁndings [ 9] indicate
that industry stakeholders prefer economic indicators, whilst municipalities consider environmental
indicators as being more important. For this case study, recycling and landﬁll rates of MSW have
yielded the lowest weighted values, whereas the economic indicators resulted in the highest weight
values. Academic institutions are the most concerned with environmental indicators. The slightly
higher value for the reduction of carbon emissions might be related to the fact that Birmingham is
committed to reduce its carbon footprint by 60% by 2027 [55,58,59].
Energies 2020 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 22 of 29 
  
Figure 3. Subjective weight values for stakeholders.  
An unexpected finding is the low subjective weight  for the Jobs creation indicator for the General 
Public stakeholder (D). As mentioned by them during the interview: ‘(…) it’s not just about jobs creation, we need skilled jobs in the area, not si mple jobs (…)’. Conversely, the most important 
indicators for the rest of the stakeholders were Investment cost and Payback. This reinforces the initial 
expectations that the stakeholders’  conflicting viewpoints might be a barrier to cooperate and thus 
reach the optimal scenario. The scenario that scored highest was NSP, followed by PR; MF was 
ranked third and the FW scenario resulted as the lowest ranked of all (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Objective weight values for scenarios. 
NSP also resulted as the most preferred scenario for all stakeholders (Figure 5). This is in line 
with previous observations where 70% or their interviewed stakeholders ranked highest the most 
sustainable performing composting plant site alte rnative [15]. However, the second most preferred 
scenario varied between stakeholders. For exampl e: stakeholders A (Com panies) and D (General 
Public) ranked MF, FW and PR in second, third and fourth places, respectively. This means that they 
prefer a business-as-usual and a breakdown scen ario over a strong policy implementation. In 
contrast, stakeholders B, C and E ranked PR, MF and FW in decreasing order. This suggested, before 
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0Investment cost
GVA impact
Payback
Carbon emissions mitigation
MSW generation reduction
Recycling rate of MSW
Landfill rate of MSW
Jobs creation
Public awareness and satisfaction
A-Companies
 B-Academic Institutions
C-Local Government
 D-General Public
E-Consultants/Externals
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5MF
PR
NSP
FW
Investment cost
 GVA impact
Payback
 Carbon emissions mitigation
MSW generation reduction
 Recycling rate of MSW
Landfill rate of MSW
 Jobs creation
Public awareness and satisfaction
Figure 3. Subjective weight values for stakeholders.
An unexpected ﬁnding is the low subjective weight for the Jobs creation indicator for the General
Public stakeholder (D). As mentioned by them during the interview: ‘( : : :) it’s not just about jobs
creation, we need skilled jobs in the area, not simple jobs ( : : :)’. Conversely, the most important
indicators for the rest of the stakeholders were Investment cost and Payback. This reinforces the initial
expectations that the stakeholders’ conﬂicting viewpoints might be a barrier to cooperate and thus
reach the optimal scenario. The scenario that scored highest was NSP , followed by PR; MF was ranked
third and the FW scenario resulted as the lowest ranked of all (Figure 4).