4.1. Outlook of Repair and Recycling
The ﬁeld study ﬁndings in regards to sources of e-waste in Mexico are consistent with that of
Cucchiella et al. [ 37], who showed that the e-waste ﬂow is primarily made up of household appliances.
Similarly, the United Nations University determined that large equipment and cooling and freezing
equipment have the represent the highest volume in the e-waste ﬂow [13].
Furthermore, the reported ﬁnding that cellphone waste has one of the lowest representations at
7% (equivalent to 301 tons/year) is also consistent with the results of Bald éet al. [ 13], who conﬁrmed
that small and telecommunications equipment constitute the lowest proportion of e-waste ﬂow. Given
an estimation of cellphone e-waste in the order of $2633 tons/year, this outlook highlights the need for
public policy incentives and further regulations in order to capture a higher proportion of cellphone
e-waste through formal channels and therefore harness the potential economic beneﬁts derived from
valuable materials.
Fieldwork results in Mexico showed that recycling processes are basic, based on both manual
operations and mechanical systems. This ﬁnding is consistent with studies by SEMARNAT [ 25],
Cruz et al. [ 8], Ghosh et al. [ 12], and Kumar et al. [ 14], as it shows that recycling processes in Mexico
and in emerging economies are elemental, simple, and do not include end-processing technologies.
Similar work of Parajuly et al. [ 15] studied the processing techniques used on recycling companies in
Europe, including medium and small recyclers used rudimentary tools and equipment, which pose
signiﬁcant health and safety risks to the workers. Nonetheless, the recovered material streams from
manual disassembly are of high purity and cleanliness, and makes it possible to recover even small
valuable components and material e-waste.
In this study, we found that informal repair shops compete in an inequitable way compared
to formal shops. However, informality was identiﬁed as a self-organized workforce that offers the
customer similar quality of work in less time and at a lower price. In Mexico, it is clear that consumers
prefer the most economic and efﬁcient solution, regardless if it is a formal or informal shop. Studies
undertaken by Atlason et al. [ 38] and Perez-Belis et al. [ 39] showed that consumers look for formal
repair stores based on the type and quality of customer service but often prefer the most economic
and efﬁcient solution in terms of repair time and price, regardless of the academic level or working
conditions of the people working there.
4.2. Material Flow Analysis of Cellphone E-Waste
After material ﬂow analysis, the ﬁeldwork reported here conﬁrmed that recycling companies
in Mexico export all PCBs extracted from cellphones. These ﬁndings are congruent with those of
Ghosh et al. [ 12], who deﬁned the different routes of recycling and end-processing technologies by
analyzing more than 150 articles; they also conﬁrmed that few countries have this type of recovery
technology, and that these materials are generally shipped to Asian and European countries. Similarly,
Cucchiella et al. [ 37] determined that Europe has unresolved issues related to recycling processes,
particularly in regards to materials recover from PCB components because of incorrect disassembly.
In order to justify the installation of this kind of end-processing technology for materials discovery
in Mexico, there has to be a solid case in terms of return on investment. Furthermore, the economic
impact study and mass analysis provide some elements for such a business case.
4.3. Economic Impact of E-Waste Materials in Printed Circuit Boards of Cellphones
Figure 4 shows the relative value of cellphone PCB materials based on the ﬁeld data presented
in Table 7. For this type of e-waste, it is clear that the most signiﬁcant opportunity in terms of
end-processing technologies centers on recovery of gold (with 79.7% of the total value in cellphone
PCB materials). In terms of materials value, 97.0% is given by potential local recovery of gold, copper,
palladium, and tin.