The analysis, evaluations, and ideas presented in this article aimed to determine the
level at which the system of indicators that are used in the Monitoring Framework for the
Transition to the Circular Economy are relevant, robust, and precise. At the same time,
the need for the current system of indicators to be completed in the current phase of
initiation and preparation for accelerating the transition process was explored.
The EU Framework contains a limited set of indicators, despite the large number of
indicators put into discussion, proposed, or analyzed. The main barrier in expanding the
set of indicators towards other important processes of circular economy consists of the lack
of sufﬁcient relevant and measured data [100–102].
There is a quite low level of engagement of the companies, whatever their size, ﬁeld
of activity, and turnover in a circular assessment process, as the reports show [ 102–106].
Based on an extensive literature, having as object the elaboration and use of indicators
for monitoring the transition process, the indicators included in the current monitoring
framework were analyzed from the point of view of the representation of the transition
policy and strategy, of the actions included in the action plan, transition, and the results
of these actions. Corresponding to the circularization of the economy, the phrase “supply
chain” must be replaced by the “supply cycle”, characterized by inputs, outputs, storage,
and recirculation [107].
It was observed that the limitation of the current monitoring framework is only to
the aspects related to the conservation of material resources (using indicators similar to
those in the analyzes of the evolution of sustainable development), even if some indirect
indicators try to complete the determination between a circular economy and sustainable
development. This observation allows the conclusion that, at the current stage, only the
narrow deﬁnition of the circular economy applies.
Even if it is found that the developed macro indicators can be disaggregated by priority
sectors, and within them by groups of materials or at regional level, company, and even
below, there are difﬁculties in correlating them with speciﬁc indicators that apply at the
micro-economic and meso-economic level [108–111].
Speciﬁcally, the system of indicators used at the macro scale does not take into account
the speciﬁc composition of the materials. It allows only a global assessment, in broad cate-
gories of raw materials and constituent materials of products. At the level of each product
and organization, there must be an intimate breakdown, based on rigorous material lists
speciﬁed by the manufacturers of the products and their components, into basic materials
and raw materials [ 112,113]. The life cycle analysis and the index (composite) of material
circularity must be available on the regenerative portion of the economy, for the intimate
highlighting of the stocks in use, as well as for the decomposition/recycling activities. Col-
laboration between material processors, product manufacturers, and waste management
organizations must be extensive, using new methods (blockchain, Big Data) [114–117].
Currently, the methodologies used to aggregate circularity indicators, broken down
into all the main components of the product cycle, at the level of product, service,
or company, are developed, but their approaches are dependent of the region/country and