The common criteria to CE actions found in Table 8 are DQ and 
update frequency. Although quality data may seem obvious for policy 
analysis, the results of this work reinforce the need for improved access 
to data throughout material life cycles (Chowdhury, 2009). Improved 
data access is further supported by the need for update frequency since 
models can only be updated when the necessary data are available. The 
variability in product granularity as a requirement supports the idea that 
multiple simultaneous actions may be most effective (Bening, 2021; 
Friant et al., 2021; Syberg, 2021) because they can cover the spectrum 
from materials broadly to specific products. It is a bit surprising that flow 
totality is not a consistent requirement as the goal of CE is to maximize 
the value of materials in society, which would imply knowledge of 
material flow in all pathways. Instead, the need for flow totality in the 
actions analyzed here depends on the scale of the action, with actions 
targeting the product-level being less likely to rely on this knowledge. 
Sensitivity to disruptions should be important to all actions because this 
knowledge informs the feasibility of an intended action. For example, if 
secondary markets cannot support material diversion from landfills, 
more planning and actions will be needed to manage the diverted ma-
terials. Understanding how the criteria apply to the various CE actions 
provides a suitable context for framing the trade-offs among the three 
modeling approaches. 
4.1. Identifying modeling trade-offs for CE actions 
Model applicability is overlaid in Table 8 based on a comparison of 
the results from analyzing the models and CE actions. Although one 
might attempt to select regional reporting (Model 3) as the “best” option 
because it seemingly fulfills 19 out of 25 ‘nodes’ in the crosswalk, the 
intent of this paper is not to recommend a particular model type but 
instead provide an understanding of the tradeoffs when selecting each 
type. Given no model considered in this work fully satisfies the required 
criteria for any of the actions, managing the trade-offs from the 
perspective of policy implementation will be more useful. For the sake of 
discussion, the selection of models will be considered as if the models 
evaluated here are the only available form of each model type. The 
limitations of the models presented here and future activities that can 
improve how the general model types fulfill the criteria are summarized 
in Section 4.2. 
For MRC and MR actions, the tradeoffs based on model selection are 
identical because of the shared criteria requirements. If the IMFA model 
is used, flow totality (although not a requirement) and product granu -
larity can be maintained, but possibly at the expense of DQ, update 
frequency, and market sensitivity. The IO-based model is weak on up-
date frequency while the regional reporting model is weak on product granularity. When it comes to decision-making, data quality should not 
be compromised. Therefore, the main trade-off for MRC and MR policies 
is between product granularity and update ease/frequency. When these 
policies target products, they need to be analyzed for effectiveness at the 
product level, which supports the use of the IO-based model. However, 
when these policies target a “material-level,” the regional reporting 
model should be preferred for monitoring frequency. 
The tradeoffs for EPR relate to flow totality and product granularity 
without sensitivity to market disruption. Flow totality presents an 
interesting challenge because only the IMFA model provides that type of 
information and yet this is the model with the highest potential for DQ 
issues. Since the DQ scores for this model vary by material (Table 6), this 
tradeoff may be minimal for material models based on higher quality 
data. For materials with low DQ scores, additional analysis of model 
sensitivity and uncertainty may be necessary to improve confidence in 
resulting decisions. If frequent policy analysis is anticipated, the IMFA 
model may also be challenging because of the effort required to update 
it. If decision makers implementing EPR actions decide flow totality can 
be sacrificed to preserve DQ, the IO-based model may be the only 
alternative because of the lack of product granularity with regional 
reporting. The advantage offered by regional reporting is its update 
frequency. 
Like EPR, LB and RRT also require flow totality and are limited in this 
respect to the use of the IMFA model. The two policy areas differ from 
EPR and each other because LB does not need models that are sensitive 
to disruptions or product granularity while RRT analysis does benefit 
from models that consider sensitivity to disruptions. After LB imple -
mentation, analyzing waste-stream impacts with the IMFA model will 
allow a holistic view of how MSW streams are or are not shifting away 
from landfills, towards recycling, or being reduced in generation vol-
ume. The best alternative for LB when DQ is a must at the expense of 
flow totality is again the regional reporting model for its update ease and 
frequency, which essentially highlights the fact the IO-based model is 
best suited for applications where product granularity is important. For 
RRT, the key tradeoff is between flow totality and sensitivity to 
disruption, since no model fulfills both requirements. Of the two, it’s 
logical to assume sensitivity to disruptions is preferred since recycling 
rates are strongly influenced by availability and price of secondary 
materials. If an RRT is enacted on a material basis, negating the need for 
product granularity, the regional reporting model is the most attractive 
option in terms of update frequency. If an RRT is enacted at the product 
level, the IO-based model will offer the most benefit. 
4.2. Limitations, harmonization, and suggestions for further research 
Ultimately, frequently published data on material movement in a 
circular economy will offer policymakers the ability to benchmark their 
progress towards recycling, materials management, and other CE goals. 
One aspect not considered in this work that can impact data is the ease of 
use each model provides based on its method of access and sophisti -
cation. For example, the WEIO model is available as a repository of R 
and python code and some knowledge of programming would be needed 
to use it. Similarly, the IMFA model is quite complex and takes time to 
learn to update and use. However, the three models analyzed in this 
work are single examples of the broader modeling approaches they 
represent. Understanding the limitations of these examples identified in 
this work and how they relate to current trends in development of the 
approaches can help shape a vision of how modeling can support CE 
policy in the future for countries that lack centralized waste data 
reporting. 
The main limitations of the IMFA model include: key data elements 
that are static and lack sensitivity to disruptions; CBI data that lack 
transparency; and complex calculations that vary from product to 
product. For example, one industry might report the recycling rate while 
the recycling rate of another must be estimated from knowledge of 
generation and landfilling. This makes it difficult to compare pathways V. Vines et al.