3.1. Circular Economy Research Progression over the Years (2010–2020)
Figure 2 shows the countries that dominate circular economy research and implementa-
tion. Germany and China were the leading countries with over 11 circular economy-related
research, followed by Australia, the United States of America, the United Kingdom, and
Italy, which have between six and 10 studies. South Africa, Mexico, Canada, Spain, and
Finland have one to ﬁve circular economy-related studies. Research on the circular econ-
omy in Africa remains minimal, with only South Africa having done more. South America
and South-East Asia did not show any research related to the circular economy.
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 16 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1. Circular Economy Research Prog ression over the Years (2010–2020) 
Figure 2 shows the countries that dominate circular economy research and imple-
mentation. Germany and China were the leading countries with over 11 circular economy-
related research, followed by Au stralia, the United States of  America, the United King-
dom, and Italy, which have between six and 10 studies. South Africa, Mexico, Canada, 
Spain, and Finland have one to five circular  economy-related studies. Research on the 
circular economy in Africa remains minimal, with only South Africa having done more. 
South America and South-East As ia did not show any research related to the circular econ-
omy. 
 
Figure 2. Countries where research on ci rcular economy has gained po pularity between 2010 and 2020. 
The global distribution of ci rcular economy research is still a long way to go besides 
the fact that it is a concept envisaged to  drive economies towards sustainable develop-
ment, reduce waste and global warming, and meet the targets of the Paris Agreement. 
Figure 2 demonstrates that more needs to be  done in adopting transformative models 
that inform the circular economy. Current linear models have reac hed their limitations 
and there is now an urgent need for a transformational change from the norm towards 
circular and cross-sectoral planning [2,67,68]. The limited uptake of the circular economy 
at the global scale is a potential risk to ac hieving the SDGs by 2030 and could derail the 
progress being made in enhancing water, energy, and food security. Even those countries that have made some effort in driving the circ ular economy, the pace has been low [2,69]. 
The absence of relevant policies compounds the challenges of the circular economy’s slow 
uptake to drive the model’s im plementation pr ocess [70,71]. 
3.2. Circular Economy Research by Sector 
The bar graph in Figure 3 illustrates the va rious research contexts or circular econ-
omy research by sector. The energy sector ha s the most circular economy-related research, 
Figure 2. Countries where research on circular economy has gained popularity between 2010 and 2020.
The global distribution of circular economy research is still a long way to go besides
the fact that it is a concept envisaged to drive economies towards sustainable development,
reduce waste and global warming, and meet the targets of the Paris Agreement.
Figure 2 demonstrates that more needs to be done in adopting transformative models
that inform the circular economy. Current linear models have reached their limitations
and there is now an urgent need for a transformational change from the norm towards
circular and cross-sectoral planning [ 2,67,68]. The limited uptake of the circular economy
at the global scale is a potential risk to achieving the SDGs by 2030 and could derail the
progress being made in enhancing water, energy, and food security. Even those countries
that have made some effort in driving the circular economy, the pace has been low [ 2,69].
The absence of relevant policies compounds the challenges of the circular economy’s slow
uptake to drive the model’s implementation process [70,71].
3.2. Circular Economy Research by Sector
The bar graph in Figure 3 illustrates the various research contexts or circular economy
research by sector. The energy sector has the most circular economy-related research,
followed by water, waste, and agriculture. Interestingly, the concept is also gaining promi-
nence in other sectors such as the food systems, mining, hospitality, and construction
industries, as evidenced by previous studies [10,19].