Changes in the Stream and Direction of Using Sewage Sludge in Poland
The amount of MSS generated in municipal wastewater treatment plants depends on the quantity
and quality of wastewater discharged to the wastewater plant. Therefore, it depends on the number of
inhabitants and other entities connected to the sewage system, the technological processes (e ectiveness
of puriﬁcation), and other factors related to the industrialization of the site and the type and technical
condition of the sewage system. The directions for the zoning of sewage sludge are also changing
(Figure 1). Their physical, chemical, and biological properties, including those related to sanitary safety,
are inﬂuenced by the possibilities and methods of sludge treatment. They also depend on how MSS
is managed and the methods for optimizing the processes leading to a reduction in its quantity and
quality changes; all of these factors determine the ﬁnal treatment methods. Technological changes and
tightening of legislation are also important criteria for the choice of sewage sludge treatment.
Sewage sludge is formed at various stages of wastewater treatment and, in general, can be divided
into waste from scrubby, sandstone, sludge stabilization, and dewatering processes, including stabilized
municipal sewage sludge. The Polish Central Statistical O ce (CSO, stat.gov.pl) does not publish data
on sewage sludge by type, but does provide information on the directions for its development.
The CSO publishes data on the production of wastewater and sewage sludge, both industrial and
municipal, where a signiﬁcant proportion of industrial wastewater is cooling water. Therefore, data on
the production of wastewater without cooling water are also presented to the industry (Figure 1).
In the urban wastewater stream, there is also some forms of industrial wastewater as well as
rainwater. Rainwater from industrial and polluted areas is particularly important. Although this
article focuses on municipal sewage sludge, general data are presented on the quantity of sewage and
sewage sludge produced, both municipal and industrial, to show the overall picture of the situation for
the country. A further analysis covers only municipal sewage sludge. The statistical data for sewage
sludge are available only from the year 2000, as they were not published before that time.
The statistics show that after the year 2000, the total amount of wastewater produced was slightly
variable and decreased, and in case of municipal treatment plants, the amount of wastewater produced
after 2000 decreased to about 163 hm3, which is almost 11% of the total production since 2000 (Table 2
and Figure 1). However, since 2015, this ﬁgure has been slowly but steadily growing (Figure 2).