3.1. Solar Panel Composite Waste  
In recent years, any government that acknowledges the need for a transition towards 
a greener society, aversion from fossil fuels, and natural resource use, place renewable 
energy source i nstallations as very high priority. EU strategies, such as the European 
Green Deal (EGD), encourage this transition, setting clear goals for clean energy produc-
tion and decarbonization of energy systems until 2050 as the energy sector accounts for 
more tha n 75% of greenhouse emissions (GHGs) in the world. The goal of the EGD is the 
decrease in GHGs at least by 50% by 2030 compared to 1990 and to reach carbon neutrality 
by 2050 [18,21,22] . At the same time, the United Nations’ (UN’s) Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) and specifically SDG 7 for affordable and clean energy supp ort such logic, 
aiming to stabilize energy security and the transition towards renewable energy. Addi-
tional economic incentives are rapidly aligning towards green energy production encour-
aging customers and governments to install solar panels, wind turbine s, etc. Even so, in 
an industry where circularity solutions remain an issue concerning composite materials 
integrated, for instance, in P/V panels, the large volume of waste after the end of life of 
the panels results in severe disposal issues [23,24] . 
Assuming the average lifespan o f P/V panels is around 25 years, the accelerated 
growth of renewable energy use will also translate to accelerated end -of-life disposal is-
sues of solar panels and extend to composite materials. Hitherto, solar panels have been 
simply manufactured, commerci alized, used, and discarded in landfills [25]. In 2018, the 
installation of P/V represented about 2% of the world’s electricity output [25], while ac-
cording to Statista [26], the projection of P/V panel waste accumulation worldwide is es-
timated to reach 1.7 million metric tons by 2030 and 60 million tons by 2050. Solar panels 
vary in composition according to the manufacture r; however, they usual constitute of sil-
icon solar cells; glass sheets; polymers, such as poly -methylmethacrylate (PMMA) also 
known as plexiglass; as well as metal frames. Such diversity in their composition compli-
cates their disposal and implementation of  circularity.  
Figure 2. PRISMA statement of current study for recruitment of scientiﬁc records, reports, and articles.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Solar Panel Composite Waste
In recent years, any government that acknowledges the need for a transition towards
a greener society, aversion from fossil fuels, and natural resource use, place renewable
energy source installations as very high priority. EU strategies, such as the European Green
Deal (EGD), encourage this transition, setting clear goals for clean energy production and
decarbonization of energy systems until 2050 as the energy sector accounts for more than
75% of greenhouse emissions (GHGs) in the world. The goal of the EGD is the decrease
in GHGs at least by 50% by 2030 compared to 1990 and to reach carbon neutrality by
2050 [18,21,22] . At the same time, the United Nations’ (UN’s) Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and speciﬁcally SDG 7 for affordable and clean energy support such logic,
aiming to stabilize energy security and the transition towards renewable energy. Additional
economic incentives are rapidly aligning towards green energy production encouraging
customers and governments to install solar panels, wind turbines, etc. Even so, in an indus-
try where circularity solutions remain an issue concerning composite materials integrated,
for instance, in P/V panels, the large volume of waste after the end of life of the panels
results in severe disposal issues [23,24].
Assuming the average lifespan of P/V panels is around 25 years, the accelerated
growth of renewable energy use will also translate to accelerated end-of-life disposal
issues of solar panels and extend to composite materials. Hitherto, solar panels have
been simply manufactured, commercialized, used, and discarded in landﬁlls [ 25]. In 2018,
the installation of P/V represented about 2% of the world’s electricity output [ 25], while
according to Statista [ 26], the projection of P/V panel waste accumulation worldwide
is estimated to reach 1.7 million metric tons by 2030 and 60 million tons by 2050. Solar
panels vary in composition according to the manufacturer; however, they usual constitute
of silicon solar cells; glass sheets; polymers, such as poly-methylmethacrylate (PMMA)
also known as plexiglass; as well as metal frames. Such diversity in their composition
complicates their disposal and implementation of circularity.