The implementation of the AMEC transition programme on
circular economy between late 2014 and March 2019 comprised
four phases. Phase 1, drafting the circular economy programme,
and phase 2, building the ﬁrst round of circular initiatives, have
been concluded. The third phase, scaling up, has begun for those
initiatives that have realised new business development. Phase 4,
mainstreaming, is not yet in sight. As a result of the efforts of the
AMEC, both strategies successfully got underway and achieved
clear results. Due to the approach chosen by the AMEC, the initia-
tives in both strategies focused on innovative solutions. However,
these should be seen as ﬁrst building blocks on the road to a circular
economy, but not yet mainstreaming. Coming close to a fully cir-
cular economy implies that a system change needs to occur in all
respects.
While at the start of the AMEC programme in 2015, the number
of circular economy activities was still limited, an explosion of
initiatives subsequently followed. The AMEC programme is now
part of the larger network of regional partners, involving local
government, industry and neighbourhoods. Because local govern-
ment and the AMEC have joined forces, their efforts are now closely
connected, also in person. In executing their initiatives, they involve
innovative business partners and active citizens as much as
possible. In this way, the network of actors aims to work system-
atically and to create cohesion in building a robust circularecosystem. The latter is sometimes lacking in transition manage-
ment, particularly when many experiments are carried out without
coordination ( Loorbach and Rotmans, 2006 ).
Ar eﬂection on the transformative change to circular economy in
the AMA over time results in a complex picture. Compared to the
transition studies on one particular technological system (from
horse-drawn carriages to automobiles [ Geels, 2005 ] and from
cesspools to sewer systems [ Geels, 2006 ]), the transition towards a
circular economy is a multi-sector system change, covering a wide
variety of product chains. Every circular initiative towards that goal
is a building block that can be scaled up and extended to other
initiatives in the same or another product chain. To cope with such
a multifaceted approach, priorities of what to do ﬁrst need to be set.
In the context of the AMEC programme, the focus in the ﬁrst four
years was on nine major resource streams and on circular pro-
curement with 31 participants. This resulted in a pipeline of circular
initiatives, each of which proceeded according to its own tailor-
made method and speed. While successful examples can be
scaled up immediately, others need more time for implementation.
In the meantime, a fresh round of initiatives can start, which will
largely follow a similar sequence of phases. As the drafting phasewill not begin from scratch, the activities in phase 1 may in part be
skipped and/or shortened. However, in phase 2, which consists of
building circular initiatives and which is the core of the trans-
formative change, similar activities to those in the ﬁrst round of
initiatives need to be carried out. This also holds for the third phase
of scaling up. It is to be expected that after the second round of
initiatives, the entire process will be repeated multiple times before
the ﬁnal stage of mainstreaming comes within reach. The
assumption is that when the urgency of moving to circular econ-
omy proliferates, the volume of circular activities enlarges and
societal support increases, the pressure on local and national gov-
ernment will augment to remove speci ﬁc fundamental barriers
which will further drive scale. When the circular activities become
dominant over linear activities, it will result in a willingness of
regional and national government to remove remaining funda-
mental barriers. This process is visualised below in the graphic of a
practice-based model for implementing circular economy ( Fig. 1 ).
This model for implementing a circular economy differs from
the four-phase model by Rotmans et al. (2001) . The latter was
designed from a national policy perspective, focusing on the
fundamental societal changes to realise a new dynamic equilib-
rium. The model presented here structures the implementation
process in practice (here: at regional level). The focus of the latter is
on the actual realisation and scaling up of circular initiatives.
Therefore, both models complement each other.
Moreover, this paper shows that the four phases discerned in
the practice-based model each represent a wide range of activities.
Table 1 summarises these activities in a so-called activity-based
implementation scheme for circular economy.
A comparison of this activity-based implementation scheme
with the transition management cycle described by Loorbach
(2010) shows that the former represents a wider range of activ-
ities. This can be explained by a difference in perspective. Loorbach
(2010) views the transition process from a management perspec-
tive, while the AMEC ’s programme pays more attention to the
actual implementation process, particularly the building and
scaling up of circular initiatives by systemic intermediaries.
Therefore, Loorbach ’s operational model for implementation needs
reﬁnement in terms of the activities to be carried out. Contrary to
what Loorbach (2010, p.172) suggests, these activities largely follow
a sequential order, but need to be repeated several times before
reaching phase 4: mainstreaming. In that sense, the change process
is not linear, but cyclic.
It should be noted that not all activities summarised in Table 1J.M. Cramer / Journal of Cleaner Production 255 (2020) 120255 6