It is clear from the literature presented above that there is a discerning focus on pharmaceutical
waste management across multiple channels; however, what is not evident is a binding mechanism,
a home for the disparate initiatives and practices to come together and make sense for the users to
adopt when tackling pharmaceutical waste. We posit that the Circular Economy philosophy o ers this.
Ocially, pharmaceutical waste management is an exceptionally specialised ﬁeld that must
be managed by qualiﬁed, skilled, and experienced sta at the administrative and ground levels.
A large amount of waste is generated in healthcare institutions, due to a lack of proper systems,
inadequate training, and a lack of balance between supply and demand within the healthcare inventory
management system, which can increase ﬁnancial and environmental issues. Proper measures
should be taken, especially medicinal stock management, evaluation, quantiﬁcation, procurement,
and utilisation, in order to improve the supply chain and minimise waste. There are many examples of
excellent practice that aspire to reduce, reuse, and recycle medicines, as noted in this study, but more
needs to be done to maximise these e orts and o er clear steering on standardised methods that
can be adopted and built into pharmacy practice. We see clear reference in this work to the basic
3Rs of CE, Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle, but endorsing CE in its entirety would prompt pharmacy,
pharma, and healthcare professionals to consider the use of green product design, production, logistics,
and dispensing to patients to move closer to the optimal 9Rs of CE.
Pharmaceutical waste management can also be both exacerbated and more e ectively managed
by the actions of healthcare providers and patients by inappropriate prescribing, repeat medication
requests, lack of compliance to medication regimes, and stockpiling, as highlighted earlier in the
paper. Measures can be taken in order to identify sources of waste creation and take steps to address
these to maximise product utilisation when in the system as a ﬁnished product, but also reduce
additional risk to the patient, their families in their homes (by returning unwanted stock to pharmacies),
and also the environment (using safe disposal methods). The role of the patient in supporting e ective
pharmaceutical waste management should not be underestimated.
From a systemic approach, the adoption of the CE and associated principles can support waste
reduction across the entire pharmaceutical supply chain. While reusing and recycling medicine helps
to reduce pharmaceutical waste from environmental and economic perspectives, their application
needs further improvement and approval by economic and government authorities and endorsement
from all supply chain stakeholders. Moreover, it is important to redesign the current pharmaceutical
product life cycle to facilitate medication reuse and minimise waste.
Four key aspects of creating a Circular PSC (CPSC) related to the internal mechanisms of
associations and the duties of various PSC actors have been identiﬁed. Figure 2 shows how these
aspects are interconnected and how they a ect the implementation of the CPSC.
A set of legislative guidelines regarding the reuse of medicines must be set in order to limit
wastage and introduce CE principles throughout the PSC, endorsed by all stakeholders. By resolving
conﬂicting goals and involving all stakeholders, including packaging manufacturers, recyclers, decision
makers, society, and consumers, pharmacists can legitimately and supportively inﬂuence patients’
understanding of proper medicine use and commitment to reducing waste generation through proper
use and disposal. They can also educate their patients on medicine-related issues, such as proper
medicine use, pharmaceuticals waste, and appropriate disposal and return methods for unused and
expired medications.
Thus, the use of the CE as a binding mechanism for existing and potential waste reduction practices
can improve pharmaceutical waste management. Table 6 shows the changes needed related to moving
from a linear chain (take, make, dispose) to a circular (proposed practice) PSC under an analytical
level. Table 7 shows a systemic multi-level appraisal of practice changes that can be undertaken to
move from a linear chain (take, make, dispose) to a circular PSC (proposed practice to expand product
lifespan and material reuse).